Face			
F001	All	Smile	Smile, by turning the corners of your mouth upwards.
F002	All	Smile, one sided	Smile one sided, by turning one corner of your mouth upwards. Repeat to the other side. 
F003	All	Reverse smile	Reverse smile, by turning the corners of your mouth downwards.
F004	All	Reverse smile, one sided	Reverse smile one sided, by turning one corner of your mouth downwards. Repeat to the other side. 
F005	All	Open eyes wide	Open your eyes as wide as possible.
F006	All	Close eye	Close one eye. Repeat each side. 
F007	All	Eyebrow lift	Lift your eyebrows as high as possible.
F008	All	Eyebrow lift, one sided	Lift one eyebrow as high as possible. Repeat to the other side. 
F009	All	Frown	Squeeze your forehead muscles to frown.
F010	All	Nose wrinkle	Wrinkle your nose and cheeks.
F011	All	Nostril flare	Close one nostril with your finger, and try to flare the opposite nostril. Repeat to the other side. 
F012	All, TMJ all, breathing all	Mouth open	Open your mouth as wide as possible. 
F013	All	Lip pout	Pout your lips outwards. 
F014	All	Stretch the lips	Try to move the ends of your lips away from each other, which will create a muscular contraction across the front of the neck. 
F015	All	Nose shift	Shift your nose to one side, and repeat to the other side. 
F016	All	Wink	Wink by slightly closing your eye, and squeezing your cheek. 
F017	All	Puffa	Keeping your mouth shut, blow outwards bulging the cheeks. 
F018	All	Puffa, one side	Keeping your mouth shut, blow outwards bulging one cheek. 
F019	All	Sucka	Keeping your mouth shut, suck your cheeks inwards. 
F020	All	Sucka, one side	Keeping your mouth shut, suck one cheek inwards. 
F021	All, other	Ice or Heat	Place an ice bag or heat pack over a swollen or painful part of your face. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too cold or too hot. 
F001A	All, assisted	Smile assisted	Smile, by lifting the corners of your mouth upwards.
F002A	All, assisted	Smile, one sided, assisted	Smile one sided, by lifting one corner of your mouth upwards. Repeat both sides. 
F003A	All, assisted	Reverse smile, assisted	Reverse smile, by moving the corners of your mouth downwards.
F004A	All, assisted	Reverse smile, one sided, assisted	Reverse smile one sided, by moving one corner of your mouth downwards. Repeat to the other sides. 
F005A	All, assisted	Open eyes wide, assisted	Open your eyes as wide as possible using your fingers to help.
F006A	All, assisted	Close eye, assisted	Close one eye by gently pulling the lid of your eye downwards, and the under part of the eye upwards. Repeat each side. 
F007A	All, assisted	Eyebrow lift, assisted	Lift your eyebrows as high as possible using your fingers to assist.
F008A	All, assisted	Eyebrow lift, one sided, assisted	Lift one eyebrow as high as possible, using your fingers to assist. Repeat the other side. 
F009A	All, assisted	Frown, assisted	Pull your forehead muscles downwards, using your fingers to assist.
F010A	All, assisted	Nose wrinkle, assisted	Wrinkle your nose and cheeks, using your fingers to assist.
F011A	All, assisted	Nostril flare, assisted	Close one nostril with your finger, and try to flare the opposite nostril, using your fingers to assist. Repeat both sides. 
F012A	All, assisted, TMJ all, breathing all	Mouth open, assisted	Open your mouth as wide as possible, using your fingers to assist.
F013A	All, assisted	Lip pout, assisted	Pout your lips, using your fingers to assist. 
F014A	All, assisted	Stretch the lips, assisted	Try to move the ends of your lips away from each other, using your fingers to assist, which will create a muscular contraction across the front of the neck. 
F015A	All, assisted	Nose shift, assisted	Shift your nose to one side, using your fingers to assist, and repeat to the other side. 
F016A	All, assisted	Wink, assisted	Wink by slightly closing your eye, and squeezing your cheek, using your fingers to assist. 
			
TMJ			
TMJ001	All	Jaw opening control	Stand in front of a mirror and open and close your mouth in a straight line making sure it does not deviate to one side. If you have trouble seeing if your jaw is deviating, draw a line on the chin and ensure it does not deviate when opening the mouth. 
TMJ002	All, face all, breathing all	Deviation	Open your mouth slightly, and deviate the lower part of your jaw to one side, and then the other.
TMJ003	All, face all, breathing all	Deviation, assisted	Open your mouth slightly, and deviate the lower part of your jaw to one side, and then the other. Use the fingers to assist. 
TMJ004	All, strengthening	Deviation, resisted	Let your jaw relax by allowing the bottom lip to open, then deviate your jaw to one side as far as comfortable against resistance of two fingers. Repeat the other side. 
TMJ005	All, strengthening	Depression, resisted	Draw your jaw downwards, against resistance. 
TMJ006	All, strengthening	Elevation, resisted	Open your mouth slightly, then with two fingers and a thumb resist closing of the jaw.
TMJ007	All	Retraction 	Pull the bottom of your jaw backwards towards the throat. You can use the fingers to assist the movement if you wish. 
TMJ008	All, strengthening	Retraction, resisted	Pull the bottom of your jaw backwards towards the throat, using resistance from your thumb under your chin. 
TMJ009	All, strengthening	Protrusion	Pull the bottom of your jaw forwards. You can use the fingers to assist the movement if you wish. 
TMJ010	All, strengthening	Protrusion, resisted	Push the bottom of your jaw forwards, using resistance from your hand.
TMJ011	All, face all, breathing all	Jaw self-massage	Using your index finger, gently massage along the line of your jaw to the chin, then up the opposite side along the jaw line. You can gently rub your fingers over any areas which feel tight or lumpy.  
TMJ012	All, face all	Teeth clench	Clench your teeth together using moderate pressure. 
TMJ013	All, other	Ice or Heat	Place an ice bag or heat pack over a swollen or painful part of your jaw. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too cold or too hot. 
			
Breathing			
BR001	All	Diaphragmatic breathing lying	Place one hand on your stomach, and your other hand on your chest. Take a deep breath in, and push your belly (and your hand) upwards. Make sure your hand on your chest does not move. 
BR002	All	Diaphragmatic breathing sitting	Place one hand on your stomach, and the other on your chest. Take a deep breath in, and push your belly (and your hand) upwards. Make sure the hand on your chest does not move. 
BR003	All	Alternate Nostril Breathing	Inhale through your right nostril, and exhale through your left nostril. Now inhale through your left nostril, and exhale through your right nostril. Always block the opposite nostril to the one you are breathing through. 
BR004	All, face all	Lion's Breath	Take a deep breath in, and then exhale and push your tongue out as far as possible. You will feel a stretch under the bottom of your tongue. 
BR005	All, face all, TMJ all	Mouth strengtheners	Place a bottle cap in-between your lips, and read out loud. 
BR006	All, face all, TMJ all	Tongue strengthener 1	Draw figure-of-eights on the roof of your mouth using your tongue. 
BR007	All, face all, TMJ all	Tongue strengthener 2	Using your lips as resistance, push your tongue against the top of your lips, then the side of your lips, the bottom of your lips, and finally the other side of your lips. 
BR008	All, face all, TMJ all	Tongue strengthener 3	Point your tongue up towards the ceiling as high as possible. Now point it down towards the floor as far as possible. 
BR009	All	Forced inhalation	Open your mouth, and breath in hard. Don't forget to push your stomach out. 
BR010	All	Forced exhalation	Open your mouth, and breath out hard. Don't forget to pull your stomach in. 
BR011	All, TMJ all, face all	Tongue stretch	Place tongue on roof of your mouth, and then slowly open your mouth. You should feel a stretch on the underside of your tongue. 
BR012	All	Sigh breath	Standing or sitting with good posture, take a deep breath in through your nose. You should concentrate on filling the lungs, and letting the stomach move outwards. As you release the air, breathe out through the mouth while making an audible sigh. 
BR013	All	Piston breathing	Standing or sitting with good posture, take a deep breath in through your nose. You should concentrate on filling the lungs, and letting the stomach move outwards. Forcibly push the air out through your nose repeatedly, until your lungs are emptied of air. 
BR014	All	Alternate nostril breathing	Standing or sitting with good posture, place your thumb next to one nostril, and your small pinky finger next to the other nostril. Now cover one nostril as you breathe in for a count of 4, then cover the opposite nostril as you breathe out for a count of 4. Repeat.  
BR015	All	Sinus drainage self-massage	Sitting in a relaxed position, use one or two fingers to massage the sinuses. Start above your eyebrows, and massage gently in a circular motion outwards towards your ears. Move your fingers to the bridge of your nose, and massage along the nose and outwards to the cheeks. Move to the jaw line, and massage down the jaw line towards the chin. Move to under the jaw, and massage downwards towards the neck. 
BR016	All	Ice to the chest (supine)	Place an ice pack or frozen peas over the chest. Wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
BR017	All	Heat to the chest (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the chest. Wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. 
BR018	All	Ice to the chest (sitting)	Place an ice pack or frozen peas over the chest. Wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
BR019	All	Heat to the chest (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the chest. Wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. 
			
Neck			
N001	All, flexion	Chin tuck	Tuck your chin in and then roll your head forwards. You should feel a gentle stretch at the back of your neck. 
N002	All, flexion	Chin tuck overstretch	Bend your neck forwards, and place a hand on your back of your head and gently pull your neck forwards to add extra stretch to your back of your neck muscles.
N003	All, flexion, stabilisation	Chin tuck, resisted	Place your palm on your forehead, and resist flexion of your neck while keeping your head still. You should feel the muscles at the front and side of your neck contracting. 
N004	All, flexion	Chin tuck, lying	Lie on your back, and lift your head off the floor/bed while tucking your chin in slightly. You should feel the muscles at the front and side of your neck contracting. 
N005	All, flexion	Chin tuck with side-bend	Bend your neck forwards, and then side-bend your neck by taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. You can use your hand to gently assist. This will allow you to feel a stretch at the back and side of your neck. 
N006	All, flexion	Levator scapulae stretch	Bend your neck forwards, and then side-bend your neck by taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. Hold on to a chair to make the stretch stronger. This will allow you to feel a stretch at the back and side of your neck. 
N007	All, flexion, rotation, breathing all	Posterior scalene stretch	Place your fingers in the webbing of your neck (just above the collar bone), and rotate your neck to the opposite side, and tuck your chin down. You will feel the stretch under your fingers at the side of the neck. 
N008	All, flexion	Sub-occipital stretch	Sit down with good posture, tuck your chin down slightly, and hold your fingers under the skull. Try to elongate your neck and pull your skull upwards with your fingers. You should feel a gentle stretch at the top of your neck under your fingers. Stop immediately if you get any dizziness. 
N009	All, flexion	Neck bend over bench	Let your neck hang forwards and down over the end of the bench. You will feel a gentle stretch at the top back of the neck. 
N010	All, flexion	Neck bend over bench 2	Let your neck hang forwards and down over the end of the bench, with your arms hanging down as well to create extra stretch. You will feel a gentle stretch at the top back of the neck. 
N011	All, flexion	Neck flattening	Lying flat, tuck your chin down to your chest reducing the gap between your neck and the floor. You will feel a gentle stretch at the top back of the neck. 
N012	All, flexion, stabilisation	Chin tuck goof ball	Bend your neck forwards, pushing against a goofball resting against the wall.
N013	All, flexion, exercise band all	Chin tuck exercise band	Attach an exercise band to the top of a door, and place it around your head. Tuck your chin down towards the chest. You will feel the muscles at the front and side of the neck contracting. Return your head to the start position. 
N014	All, extension	Neck extension mobilisation	Tilt your head backwards in a slow and controlled manner. You may feel some compression tension building up at the back of the neck, so stop the extension at that point. Stop the exercise immediately if you get any dizziness or blurred vision. 
N015	All, extension, thoracic spine extension	Neck extension, lying	Lying face down, lift your head off the floor or bed. You will feel the muscles in the lower back of the neck. Stop the exercise immediately if you get any dizziness or blurred vision.
N016	All, extension	Neck extension overstretch	Sitting down, tilt your head backwards and with your hands on your top of your head apply a small amount of pressure to stretch your front neck muscles. Stop your exercise immediately if you get any dizziness or blurred vision. 
N017	All, extension, stabilisation	Neck extension, resisted	Place your palm on the back of your head, and resist tilting your head backwards. Keep the head still. You may feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the back of the neck. 
N018	All, extension	Neck extension stretch	Place your hands behind your back, and gently tilt your neck (moving your ear towards your shoulder). You can lift your chin slightly if you wish. You should feel a stretch on the opposite side. 
N019	All, extension, breathing all	Hyoid stretch	Extend your neck backwards, gently, and close your jaw to feel a stretch at the top of your throat. Stop the exercise immediately if you get any dizziness or blurred vision. 
N020	All, extension, stabilisation	Neck extension over bench	Lying face down with your head hanging over a bench, keep your chin tucked, and extend your neck to the horizontal position. You will feel the muscles at the back of your neck contracting. 
N021	All, extension, stabilisation	Neck extension over bench 2	Lying face down with your head hanging over a bench, keep your chin tucked, and hyper-extend your neck by taking it above the horizontal. You will feel the muscles at the back of your lower neck contracting. 
N022	All, extension, posture all	Improving neck lordosis 1	Lying on your back. Start by using a pillow to support your head, and place a rolled up towel (of approx 4 inch diameter) under your neck. You should feel the towel pushing upwards into your neck. This is a great exercise for people who spend too much time forward flexing their necks, e.g. computer and laptop users.  
N023	All, extension, posture all	Improving neck lordosis 2	Lying on your back, place a rolled up towel (of approx 4 inch diameter) under your neck. You should feel the towel pushing upwards into your neck. This is a great exercise for people who spend too much time forward flexing their necks, e.g. computer and laptop users.
N024	All, extension, posture all	Improving neck lordosis 3	Lying on your back, place a 4 inch diameter foam roller under your neck. You should feel the foam roller pushing upwards into your neck. This is a great exercise for people who spend too much time forward flexing their necks, e.g. computer and laptop users.
N025	All, extension	Neck extension goof ball	Tilt your neck backwards pushing against a goofball resting against the wall. You will feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the back of your neck, to help strengthen the neck. 
N026	All, extension, exercise band all	Neck extension exercise band	Attach the exercise band on the floor (under a table leg usually works well, or under a heavy weight), and with your neck flexed forwards, move your neck backwards into extension creating resistance in the band. You will feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the back of your neck. Return your head to the start position. 
N027	All, rotation	Neck rotation	Rotate your neck slowly to the left by looking over your left shoulder. Take your neck to a comfortable end of range. Repeat to the right. Make sure you keep your shoulder and back relaxed. This is an excellent exercise to improve rotation and mobility in your neck. 
N028	All, rotation	Neck rotation overstretch	Rotate your neck to its end of range. Place the palm of your hand on the side of your neck, and gently push your neck into slightly more rotation. This is an excellent exercise to improve rotation and mobility in your neck. 
N029	All, rotation, stabilisation	Neck rotation, resisted	Place the palm of your hand on the side of your neck, and gently push your neck into rotation while you try to keep your face/nose pointing forwards and your head still. You should feel a contraction of neck muscles on the same side you are pushing into. 
N030	All, rotation	Neck rotation stretch lying	Rotate your neck slowly to the left by looking over your left shoulder. Take your neck to a comfortable end of range. Repeat to the right. Make sure you keep your shoulder relaxed. This is an excellent exercise to improve rotation and mobility in your neck. 
N031	All, rotation	Neck rotation stretch standing	Stand with your back against a wall, and place one arm up to 90 degrees as shown. Rotate your neck to the opposite side. You should feel a stretch in the lower side of the neck on the same side you are lifting your arm. 
N032	All, rotation	Neck semi-circles	Circle your neck to one side, and then the other side. Move your neck in a semi-circle direction. Don't worry if you get some crunching or scrunching in the neck, this is normal. You can use this exercise to get the neck more mobile. 
N033	All, rotation	Neck rotation goof ball	Rotate your neck into a goof ball resting on the wall. You will feel a gentle contraction of your side-neck muscles closest to the ball. 
N034	All, rotation, extension, breathing all	Anterior scalene stretch	Hook your fingers above your collar bone, and gently rotate your neck to the same side, then extend your neck backwards. You should feel the stretch at the front of your neck under your fingers. To make the stretch stronger, try rotating your neck away from your fingers and then extending your neck backwards. 
N035	All, extension, exercise band all	Neck rotation exercise band	Put an exercise band around your neck, and pull it to one side. Now rotate your neck away from the exercise band, creating a resistance in the band. You should feel a gentle contraction of the side-neck muscles on the side closest to the band. Return your head to the start position. 
N036	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion stretch	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. Now repeat to the right. This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck. 
N037	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion overstretch	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. Use your hand to gently pull the neck a little further, creating a stretch on the opposite side of your neck. Now repeat to the right.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N038	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion stretch 2	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. To increase the stretch, drop your right shoulder and gently pull your right arm downwards with the opposite hand. You should feel a stretch to the side of your neck, on the side you are pulling your arm. Repeat to the right.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N039	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion overstretch 2	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder, using your hand to gently apply overpressure. Hold on to a chair to make the stretch stronger. You should feel the stretch to your neck on the same side you are holding on to the chair. Repeat to the right.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N040	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion stretch 3	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. To increase the stretch, straighten your right arm away from your body, drop your shoulder slightly, and straighten your fingers. You should feel a stretch to your neck on the same side you lift your arm. Repeat to the right.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N041	All, side-flexion	Neck side-flexion overstretch 3	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards, bend your neck as if you were taking your left ear towards your left shoulder. To increase the stretch, straighten your right arm away from your body, drop your shoulder slightly, and straighten your fingers. Use the opposite hand to gently apply more pressure. You will feel a stretch on the same side you are extending your arm. Repeat to the right.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N042	All, side-flexion, breathing all	Mid-scalene/SCM stretch	Hook your fingers above your collar bone, and gently side-bend your neck to the opposite side. Hold the stretch. You should feel the stretch at the front/side of your neck.  This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N043	All, side-flexion, breathing all	Mid-scalene/SCM stretch (stronger)	Hook your fingers above your collar bone, and gently side-bend your neck to the opposite side. Hold the stretch. You can make the stretch stronger by extending your neck. You should feel the stretch at the front/side of your neck. This exercise will help improve mobility to your neck.
N044	All, side-flexion, stabilisation	Neck side-flexion resisted	Ensuring your nose is pointing forwards during the whole exercise, place your palm on the side of your head and resist bending your head towards your ear. Keep your head still. You will feel the muscles at the side of your neck contracting. 
N045	All, side-flexion, stabilisation	Neck side-flexion strengtheners	Lying on your side, bend your neck by taking your ear towards your shoulder. You will feel the muscles on the side of your neck contracting. Turn over and repeat to the other side. 
N046	All, side-flexion, stabilisation	Neck side-flexion goof ball	Side-bend your neck into a goof ball resting on the wall. You will feel the muscles on the side of your neck contracting.
N047	All, side-flexion, exercise band all	Neck side-flexion exercise band	Attach the exercise band to your head by tying a loop and placing it over your head, and bend your neck by moving your ear towards your shoulder. You will feel the muscles on the side of your neck contracting. Return to the start position. 
N048	All, retraction, posture all	Drawing the chin back	Pull your head back as far as possible and down slightly. You will feel some gentle tension at the front and back of your neck. This exercise will help posture. 
N049	All, retraction, stabilisation, posture all	Drawing the chin back resisted	Placing both hands behind your head, attempt to pull your head backwards while tucking your chin in slightly, but resist this movement with your hands. Keep your head still. You will feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the back of the neck. 
N050	All, retraction, posture all	Drawing the chin back goof ball	Pull your head back as far as possible and down slightly, creating resistance against a goof ball. You may feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the front and back of your neck. This exercise will help posture.
N051	All, retraction, exercise band all	Draw the chin back exercise band	Attach the exercise band around your head by creating a loop, and then against resistance draw your head backwards and tuck your chin down slightly. You may feel a gentle contraction of the muscles at the front and back of your neck. Return to the start position. 
N052	All, protraction	Drawing the chin forwards	Move your head as far forwards as feels comfortable. Make sure your head stays on the horizon line (i.e. it does not drop forwards). 
N053	All, protraction, stabilisation	Drawing the chin forwards, resisted	Place your hand on your head and resist the movement of your head forwards. Your head should not actually move forwards as your hand is stopping it, but instead you will feel a muscular contraction at the side and front of your neck. 
N054	All, neural	Ulnar nerve stretch	Make goggles with your thumb and index finger, then turn the goggles upside down so the thumb pad is facing towards your face. You will feel a stretch going through the arms. This exercise is a nerve stretch. 
N055	All, neural	Median nerve stretch	Standing next to a wall, place your palm on it with your fingers facing down and arm straight, and side-bend your neck towards the opposite side. You will feel a stretch in your arm, shoulder and slightly into the side of your neck. This exercise is a nerve stretch. 
N056	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation with BP cuff	Lie flat on your back with your body in a neutral position, place a blood pressure cuff under your neck, and pump it up to 20mmHg. Feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin, while elongating your neck, to create a small rise in pressure. Try not to use any other muscles, except those under your jaw and on the front of your neck. 
N057	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation with towel	Lie flat on your back with your body in a neutral position, place a towel under your neck. Feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin, while elongating your neck, to create a gentle resistance. Try not to use any other muscles, except those under your jaw and on the front of your neck. 
N058	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation sitting with BP cuff	Sit on a chair or the floor, and rest your head against the wall with a blood pressure cuff under the base of your neck. Pump it up to 10-20mmHg. Feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin, while elongating your neck, to create a small rise in pressure. Try not to use any other muscles, except those under your jaw and on the front of your neck. 
N059	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation sitting with towel	Sit on a chair or the floor, and rest your head against the wall with a towel under the base of your neck. Feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin, while elongating your neck, to create a small rise in pressure. Try not to use any other muscles, except those under your jaw and on the front of your neck. 
N060	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation lying head lift 	Lie flat on your back, and feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under the jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin. Lift your head just 1cm from the floor. You should only be using your front neck muscles, so breath normally and even talk if you want, while holding this position. 
N061	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation lying head lift + side-flexion	Lie flat on your back, and feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin. Lift your head just 1cm from the floor. Gently side-bend your neck just 2-3 cm each side, slowly. Breathe normally. 
N062	All, stabilisation	Anterior stabilisation lying head lift + rotation	Lie flat on your back, and feel your front neck muscles by placing your fingers just under your jaw, and use these muscles to gently tuck your chin. Lift your head just 1cm from the floor. Gently rotate your neck just 2-3 cm each side, slowly. Breathe normally. 
N063	All, stabilisation	Upper cervical stabilisation	Lying flat, with a four inch diameter towel under your neck, tuck your chin down to your chest gently while elongating your neck. Try to breathe normally, and stay relaxed. The movement and resistance is gentle, so don't do it too hard. 
N064	All, stabilisation	Upper cervical stabilisation sitting	Sit upright, with good posture, and place your fingers behind your head with your thumbs on your cheek bones. Apply gentle resistance to tuck your chin slightly, while elongating your neck. Your head stays perfectly still while you apply the resistance, which should be gentle. 
N065	All, stabilisation	Posterior cervical stabilisation prone	Lie on your front, with your head 2-3 cm above the floor. Make sure your chin is tilted downwards slightly, so your face is horizontal with your body. You should feel the back of your neck tensing slightly to hold your head up, while all your other muscles remain relaxed. Breathe normally. 
N066	All, stabilisation	Posterior cervical stabilisation sitting	Sit on a chair, with your back and neck reclined. Gently tuck the chin slightly down while elongating the neck. You should feel a gentle pull at the back of the neck. 
N067	All, stabilisation	Posterior cervical stabilisation standing	Stand approximately 1 foot from a wall, place a towel behind your head, and lean against the towel. Make sure your body has good straight alignment, and keep your chin up. If you find this easy, stand a little further from the wall. You should feel a gentle muscle contraction at the back of your neck (you may not feel it at first, but after 20-30 seconds you will feel the muscle contraction). 
N068	All, stabilisation	Sitting stabilisation	Sit with your head resting against a wall, and gently tuck your chin slightly down while elongating the neck. The trick is not to feel your neck muscles getting tense, so the movement is very subtle. 
N069	All, stabilisation	Lateral cervical stabilisation	Lie with your head unsupported and in-line with your body, and maintain this position. Keep your head perfectly still against gravity, and breathe normally. Repeat the other side. 
N070	All, stabilisation	Cervical extension stabilisation sitting	Sitting upright with good posture, slightly tuck your chin downwards and maintaining your chin in this position, gently extend (arch) your neck. You will feel a stretch at the front and maybe the back of your neck. Breathe normally. 
N071	All, stabilisation	Cervical extension stabilisation prone	Lie face down, tuck your chin towards your chest slightly, and maintaining your chin in this position, gently extend (arch) your neck. You will feel a stretch at the front and maybe the back of your neck. Breathe normally. 
N072	All, stabilisation	Cervical extension stabilisation with rotation	Sitting upright with good posture, slightly tuck your chin downwards and maintaining your chin in this position, gently extend (arch) your neck. Gently and with a small amount of movement, rotate your neck to one side then the other. You will feel a stretch at the lower part of the back of your neck, and it can be uncomfortable so go gently. Breathe normally. 
N073	All, stabilisation	Laser pen game	Attach a LASER-pen to your head using a support (a cycle helmet works quite well). Moving your neck, control the movement of the LASER pen. Draw circles, go to numbers on a clock, draw pictures or work your way through a wall maze, to improve control and co-ordination of the neck muscles. 
N074	All, other	Ice (sitting)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas over your neck. Keep good posture. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too cold.
N075	All, other	Heat (sitting)	Place a heat pack over your neck. Keep good posture. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too hot. 
N076	All, other	Ice (lying)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas under your neck. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too cold.
N077	All, other	Heat (lying)	Place a heat pack under your neck. Make sure you wrap it in a towel so its not too hot. 
			
			
Shoulder			
S001	Circumduction	Pendulum	Lean over holding on to a chair or table, let your arm hang down by your side, and swing your arm gently in circles. Try to let momentum and gravity move your arm. Go anti-clockwise and clockwise. This exercise is a great way to passively mobilise a stiff shoulder. 
S002	Circumduction	Side-arm circles	Draw gentle circles with your arm to the side of your body. Move your arm clockwise and anti-clockwise. This exercise will actively mobilise a stiff shoulder. 
S003	Circumduction, abduction	Wash on, wash off	Draw circles with your palm in a clockwise movement, and then an anti-clockwise movement, as if you were wiping a car windscreen or a window. This exercise is a useful mobility exercise for the shoulder. 
S004	Flexion	Passive flexion arm lift	Use your good arm to lift your painful arm (which should stay relaxed). Take your arm as high as feels comfortable. This exercise will help improve your shoulder mobility. 
S005	Flexion	Passive flexion arm lift lying	Use your good arm to lift your painful arm (which should stay relaxed). Take your arm as high as feels comfortable. This exercise will help improve your shoulder mobility. 
S006	Flexion	Passive flexion arm lift lying dowel rod	Use your good arm to lift the dowel rod or stick, and hold on to the other end with your bad arm. Make sure your painful arm stays relaxed. Take your arm as high as feels comfortable. This exercise will help improve your shoulder mobility. 
S007	Flexion	Active flexion	Lift your arm above your head, as far as feels comfortable. 
S008	Flexion	Resisted flexion	Resist lifting your arm forwards. Your arm should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the shoulder (mostly to the anterior deltoid, or front shoulder muscle). 
S009	Flexion	Wall crawl forwards	Walk your fingers up the wall. When you reach your limit (discuss what point this should be with your therapist - if in doubt, keep the movement within your comfort zone), walk your fingers back down the wall. This exercise will help improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S010	Flexion, abduction, adduction	The football supporter	Take a scarf, hand towel or dowel rod, and grasp both ends. Lift it above your head, and slowly move the scarf from side-to-side as if you were waving a football scarf. This exercise will help improve mobility to the shoulder, but if your shoulder is stiff, start gently as it can be uncomfortable. 
S011	Flexion, abduction, adduction	The football supporter lying	Take a scarf, hand towel or dowel rod, and grasp both ends. Lift it to 90 degrees as shown, and slowly move the scarf from side-to-side. his exercise will help improve mobility to the shoulder, but if your shoulder is stiff, start gently as it can be uncomfortable.
S012	Flexion, exercise band all	Band flexion	Place an exercise band under your foot, and lift the other end upwards. When you have reached your limit, move your arm back down. This is a strengthening exercise for the shoulder (mostly to the anterior deltoid, or front shoulder muscle).
S013	Flexion	Door frame stretch single arm	Place your arm above a door frame, and walk forwards creating a stretch underneath your armpit. This is an advanced mobility exercise for the shoulder. 
S014	Flexion	Door frame stretch double arm	Place your arms above a door frame, and walk forwards creating a stretch underneath your armpits. This is an advanced mobility exercise for the shoulder. 
S015	Flexion	Prone lying one arm	Lying on your tummy, rest with your arm above your head. If your shoulder is stiff, you may be unable to lie in this position, so do not push it too hard and make the exercise easier by bending the elbow.
S016	Flexion	Prone lying two arms	Lying on your tummy, rest with your arms above your head. If your shoulder is stiff, you may be unable to lie in this position, so do not push it too hard and make the exercise easier by bending the elbow.
S017	Flexion, exercise band all, abduction	Upright row with band	Standing with good posture, lift your arms up to horizontal creating resistance in the exercise band. This exercise helps to strengthen the mid-deltoid muscle. 
S018	Flexion, abduction, Swiss ball all, dumbbell all	Prone lower trapezius raise	Lying face down on a Swiss ball all (or bed if you do not have one), grasp a dumbbell in each hand, and lift one arm to 45 degrees outwards from your body to shoulder height. Return it to the starting position and repeat on the other side. This exercise strengthens the lower trapezius muscle which helps to hold the shoulder blade down, reducing shoulder pain and impingement. 
S019	Flexion, abduction, dumbbell all	Military press	Standing or sitting, grasp a dumbbell in each hand, and lift it above your head. This exercise works the deltoid muscle group. 
S020	Flexion, dumbbell all	Shoulder push	Grasp a dumbbell in each hand, and lift the dumbbell above your head with one arm, then the other. This exercise strengthens the deltoid muscle group. 
S021	Flexion, dumbbell all	Front raise with DB	Lift your arm to your front, while holding a dumbbell. Ask your therapist how far you should lift the weight. This exercise predominantly strengthens the anterior deltoid. 
S022	Flexion, elbow flexion	Triceps stretch	Lift your arm above your head, and try to pull your arm back down while putting resistance through the elbow. Your arm should not move. You should feel a stretch under your arm (between your elbow and shoulder).  
S023	Flexion	Triceps and lats stretch	Lift your arm above your head, and try to pull your arm back down while putting resistance through the elbow. Your arm should not move. Side bend your body away from your arm to create a stretch just behind your armpit. 
S024	Flexion, dumbbell all, Swiss ball all	Chest press on ball	Lying on your back on a Swiss ball all, with a dumbbell in each arm, push the weights above your head by straightening your arms. If you dot have a ball you can use a bench. This exercise predominantly works the pectoral and triceps muscle groups. 
S025	Extension	Passive extension	Use your good arm to push your other arm backwards, as far as feels comfortable. The arm being pushed should stay completely relaxed. This exercise improves mobility to your shoulder. 
S026	Extension	Active extension	Move your arm backwards behind your body. This exercise improves mobility to your shoulder. 
S027	Extension, retraction, posture all	Prone active extension	Lying face down on the floor, lift your arm(s) backwards (upwards) against gravity. This exercise mobilises the shoulder, but also increases strength in the scapular (shoulder blade) and triceps (upper arm) muscles. 
S028	Extension	Resisted extension	Resist extending your arm backwards. Your arm should not move. This exercise will predominantly strengthen the posterior deltoid (back shoulder) muscle. 
S029	Extension, exercise band all	Resisted extension with band one arm	Holding onto an exercise band, pull your arm backwards. You will feel the muscles behind the back of the arm (triceps) contracting. 
S030	Extension, exercise band all	Resisted extension with band two arms	Holding onto an exercise band, pull your arms backwards. You will feel the muscles behind the back of the arms (triceps) contracting. 
S031	Extension, external rotation, breathing all, posture all	Pec stretch	Place your arm around a door frame, and lean forwards creating a stretch across your upper arm, front shoulder and slightly into your chest. This exercise stretches the pectoral muscle. 
S032	Extension, external rotation, breathing all, posture all	Pec stretch straight arm	Place your arm around a door frame, and lean forwards creating a stretch across your upper arm, front shoulder and slightly into your chest. This exercise stretches the pectoral muscle. 
S033	Extension, external rotation, Swiss ball all, breathing all, posture all	Pec stretch SB	Kneeling on your hands and knees, place a Swiss ball all under your arm near to your armpit. Drop your body down to create a stretch over your upper arm and slightly into your chest. This exercise stretches the pectoral muscle. 
S034	Extension	Extension with dowel rod lying	Lying face down, extend your arms behind your back while grasping a pole, rod or golf club. You will feel the muscles behind the upper arms contracting. 
S035	Extension	Extension with dowel rod standing	Extend your arms behind your back while grasping a pole, rod or golf club. 
S036	Abduction, adduction	Rock the baby	Keep your stronger arm under your painful arm, so that your stronger arm is supporting it. Gently rock your arm to one side, and then the other, as if you were rocking a baby. This is an excellent mobility exercise for stiff and painful shoulders. 
S037	Abduction, flexion	Passive 30 degree arm lift	Your good arm lifts your sore arm upwards, in a 30 degree angle from the front. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S038	Abduction, flexion	Passive 45 degree arm lift	Your good arm lifts your sore arm upwards, in a 45 degree angle from the front. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S039	Abduction	Passive 90 degree arm lift	Your good arm lifts your sore arm out to the side of your body.  This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S040	Abduction, flexion	30 degree wall crawl	Walk your fingers up the wall, but not directly to the side, but at a 30 degree angle from the front as shown in the picture. When you reach your limit (discuss what point this should be with your therapist), walk your fingers back down the wall. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S041	Abduction, flexion	45 degree wall crawl	Walk your fingers up the wall, but not directly to the side, but at a 45 degree angle from the front as shown in the picture. When you reach your limit (discuss what point this should be with your therapist), walk your fingers back down the wall. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S042	Abduction	90 degree wall crawl	Walk your fingers up the wall, to the side of your body. When you reach your limit (discuss what point this should be with your therapist), walk your fingers back down the wall. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S043	Abduction, flexion	30 degree arm lift	Take your arm outwards 30 degrees from the front, and lift your arm up as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S044	Abduction, flexion	45 degree arm lift	Take your arm outwards 45 degrees from the front, and lift your arm up as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S045	Abduction	90 degree arm lift	Take your arm to the side of your body, and lift your arm up as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S046	Abduction, external rotation	90 degree arm lift with external rotation	Take your arm to the side of your body, and lift it up to horizontal. At this point, turn your palm upwards, and continue as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S047	Abduction	90 degree double arm lift	Take your arms to the side of your body, and lift them up as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S048	Abduction, external rotation	90 degree double arm lift with external rotation	Take your arms to the side of your body, and lift them up to horizontal. At this point, turn your palms upwards, and continue as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S049	Abduction, flexion, exercise band all	Band flexion 30 degrees	Place an exercise band under your foot, and lift the other end upwards. Take your arm out slightly to the side (30 degrees from the front). When you have reached your limit, move your arm back down. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S050	Abduction, flexion, exercise band all	Band flexion 45 degrees	Place an exercise band under your foot, and lift the other end upwards. Take your arm out slightly to the side (45 degrees from the front). When you have reached your limit, move your arm back down. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S051	Abduction, flexion, exercise band all	Band flexion 90 degrees	Place an exercise band under your foot, and lift the other end towards the side of your body. When you have reached your limit, move your arm back down. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S052	Abduction	Wall crawl	Walk your fingers up the wall, directly to your side. When you reach your limit (discuss what point this should be with your therapist), walk your fingers back down the wall. This exercise will improve mobility and strength to your shoulder. 
S053	Abduction, flexion, external rotation	Drawing the sword	Start with your thumb pointing down, somewhere near your opposite knee, and then lift your arm above your head and to the side. At the top of the movement, your thumb should be pointing upwards (i.e. the arm has turned out). Imagine you are drawing a sword out of its sheath. Return to the start position. This is a great mobility and strengthening exercise for your shoulder. 
S054	Abduction, flexion, external rotation, exercise band all	Drawing the sword with band	Start with your thumb pointing down, somewhere near your opposite knee, and taking the band lift your arm above your head and to the side. At the top of the movement, your thumb should be pointing upwards (i.e. the arm has turned out). Imagine you are drawing a sword out of its sheath. Return to the start position. This is a great mobility and strengthening exercise for your shoulder.
S055	Abduction, flexion, external rotation, dumbbell all	Drawing the sword with dumbbell	Grasp a dumbbell with your palm facing back, somewhere near your opposite knee, and lift your arm above your head and to the side. At the top of the movement, your palm should be facing forwards (i.e. the arm has turned out). Imagine you are drawing a sword out of its sheath. Return to the start position. This is a great mobility and strengthening exercise for your shoulder.
S056	Abduction	Resisted abduction	Resist lifting your arm to the side. Your arm should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the shoulder, mostly the mid-deltoid muscle. 
S057	Abduction, breathing all, posture all	Bilateral pec stretch	Place your arms at 90 degrees, with your palms flat on the wall, and face towards a corner. Push your body into the corner keeping your hands in the same position. You will feel a stretch across your upper arms, front shoulders and chest. 
S058	Abduction, exercise band all	Bilateral abduction with band	Hold your arms by your side, in front of you, and stretch them away from your body using a band for resistance. You will feel some muscle contraction in your upper arms. 
S059	Abduction	Active pendulum	Leaning forwards, let both arms hang by your side. Gently move your arms just a few inches away from each other before returning to the start position. As you get more confident you can keep increasing the distance between your arms until you can lift your arms to the horizontal. This is an active mobility exercise for your shoulders. 
S060	Abduction, other	Scaption with dowel rod	Holding two ends of a dowel rod in each hand, lift the rod to the side of your body, and then to the other side. The movement should be controlled, not too fast. Try to let the painful arm stay as relaxed as possible, so you control the movement with the good arm. This is a useful mobility exercise for your shoulders. 
S061	Abduction, dumbbell all, Swiss ball all, retraction, posture all	Horizontal abduction raise with DB on SB	Lying face down on a Swiss ball or a bench, grasp a dumbbell in each hand and take your arms out to your side to the horizontal. Squeeze your shoulder blades slightly during the movement. You will feel the muscle contraction in the upper back mostly. 
S062	Abduction, dumbbell all	Lateral raise with dumbbell	Holding a dumbbell, lift your arm to the side to shoulder level. Slowly return to your side. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder.  
S063	Abduction, dumbbell all	Lateral 45 degree raise with dumbbell	Holding a dumbbell, lift your arm at a 45 degree angle to the side, to shoulder level. Slowly return to your side. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder. 
S064	Abduction, Swiss ball all, elbow flexion, elbow extension	Outward ball roll	Sitting on the floor, with the ball at your side and your arm resting on the ball, straighten your arm slowly. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S065	Adduction	Stroking the shoulder blade	Reach behind the same shoulder, towards your shoulder blade. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S066	Adduction	Stroking the shoulder blade 2	Reach behind the opposite shoulder, towards your shoulder blade. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder.
S067	Adduction	Resisted adduction	Resist moving your arm across your body. Your arm should not move. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder.
S068	Adduction, abduction, protraction	Mid-deltoid stretch	Place your arm across your chest, and resist pulling your arm away from your body. Your arm should not move. This exercise stretches the mid-deltoid muscle located in the upper arm and shoulder. 
S069	Adduction, exercise band all	Adduction with band	Start with your arm up high and to your side, and pull a band downwards towards your opposite knee. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder.
S070	Adduction	Adduction with goof ball	Place a goof ball (or football) under your arm resting against your side, and push your arm into the ball. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder.
S071	Adduction, Swiss ball all, dumbbell all, elbow extension	Chest press with DB	Lying on a Swiss ball or bench, grasp dumbbells in your hands with your elbows bent at 90 degrees. Straighten your arms to lock your elbows out, and bring the weights close together. This exercise predominantly strengthens the pectoral (chest) and triceps (upper arm) muscles. 
S072	Adduction, Swiss ball all, dumbbell all	Pec fly with DB	Lying flat on a Swiss ball or bench, with your arms out straight, grasping a weight, bring your arms in towards each other. Keep your arms straight at all times, and the weights should meet in the middle. This exercise strengthens the pectoral (chest) muscles. 
S073	Adduction, wrist extension, stabilisation	Prayer Push	Place your hands together, as if you were praying, and push towards each other. 
S074	Internal Rotation	Towel dryer	Your good arm holds the towel above your head, and your sore arm relaxes behind your back. Lift your sore arm by pulling upwards with your good arm. You will feel a stretch/discomfort deep in your shoulder. Sometimes if your shoulder is sore, this exercise can be uncomfortable, but it does increase the mobility of your shoulder. 
S075	Internal Rotation	The Bra-strap exercise passive	Use your comfortable arm to move your sore arm behind your back, as if you were reaching for your bra strap, but only go as far as feels comfortable. Try to keep your sore arm as relaxed as possible. You should feel a gentle pulling at the front of your shoulder. Sometimes if your shoulder is sore this exercise can be uncomfortable, but it does increase the mobility of your shoulder. 
S076	Internal Rotation	The Bra-strap exercise	Reach your arm behind your back, as if you were reaching for your bra strap, but only go as far as feels comfortable. You should feel a gentle pulling at the front/deep in your shoulder. Sometimes if your shoulder is sore this exercise can be uncomfortable but it does increase the mobility of your shoulder, but it does increase the mobility of your shoulder. 
S077	Internal Rotation	Active internal rotation standing	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm inwards towards your stomach. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder. 
S078	Internal Rotation	Active internal rotation lying	Lying on your good side, Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm inwards towards your stomach. This exercise will improve mobility to your shoulder.
S079	Internal Rotation, exercise band all	Internal rotation with band	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm inwards towards your stomach using the band as resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S080	Internal Rotation, exercise band all	Ascended 90 degrees internal rotation with band	Lift your elbow to 90 degrees, and rotate your arm inwards, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S081	Internal Rotation, exercise band all	Ascended 120 degrees internal rotation with band	Lift your elbow to 90 degrees, and rotate your arm inwards, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S082	Internal rotation	Resisted internal rotation	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and resist the movement of your arm inwards towards your stomach. Your arm should not move. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S083	Internal rotation	Resisted internal rotation door frame	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and resist the movement of your arm inwards towards your stomach by pulling against a door frame. Your arm should not move. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S084	Internal Rotation, exercise band all	Desk internal rotation with band	Resting your elbow on a desk, with your arm bent at 90 degrees, rotate your arm inwards towards the table, creating a resistance with the band. Your elbow stays in contact with the desk the whole time. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S085	Internal Rotation, dumbbell all	Desk internal rotation with DB	Resting your elbow on a desk, with your arm bent at 90 degrees, rotate your arm inwards towards the table, while holding a dumbbell. Your elbow stays in contact with the desk the whole time. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S086	Internal rotation	Supine internal rotation	Rest your elbow on the floor or bed, and rotate your arm so that your palm goes towards the floor. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S087	Internal rotation	Internal rotation with over-pressure	Lying on your injured side (if its too uncomfortable to lie on this side, then stop the exercise), bend your arm to right angles, and gently push your palm towards the floor. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S088	Internal rotation	Internal rotation with dowel rod	Place your hands behind your back, holding on to both ends of a dowel rod, and lift the rod as high up your back as you feel comfortable. Return to your start position. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulders. 
S089	Internal rotation, external rotation	Hand grab behind back	Place one hand behind your neck, and the other towards the small of your back. Try to join your hands together. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S090	External rotation	Active external rotation standing	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm outwards away from your stomach. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S091	External rotation	Active external rotation lying	Lying on your good side, tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm outwards away from your stomach. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S092	External rotation	Surrender position standing	Stand up and put your arms up into a surrender position. You can rest them against a wall if you wish. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S093	External rotation	Surrender position supine	Lying on your back, put your arms up into a surrender position. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S094	External rotation	Surrender position supine with dowel rod	Lying on your back, put your arms up into a surrender position using a dowel rod to control the movement. This is a mobility exercise for your shoulder. 
S095	External rotation	Pec stretch supine	Lying flat on your back, place your hands behind your head. Try to gently drop your elbows towards the floor. You may feel a stretch in the front of the shoulder and the upper chest (pectoral muscle). 
S096	External rotation, exercise band all	External rotation with band	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and move your arm outwards away from your stomach, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S097	External rotation, exercise band all	External rotation with band both sides	Tuck your elbows in, keeping them next to your body, and hold two ends of an exercise band. Move your arms outwards away from your stomach, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S098	External rotation, exercise band all	Ascended 90 degrees external rotation with band	Lift your elbow to 90 degrees, and rotate your arm outwards, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S099	External rotation, exercise band all	Ascended 120 degrees external rotation with band	Lift your elbow to 120 degrees, and rotate your arm outwards, using the band for resistance. This is an important strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S100	External rotation, exercise band all	Desk external rotation with band	Resting your elbow on a desk, with your arm bent at 90 degrees, rotate your arm outwards away from the table creating a resistance with the band. Your elbow stays in contact with the desk the whole time. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S101	External rotation, dumbbell all	Desk external rotation with DB	Resting your elbow on a desk, with your arm bent at 90 degrees, rotate your arm outwards away from the table while holding a dumbbell. Your elbow stays in contact with the desk the whole time. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S102	External rotation	Resisted external rotation	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and resist the movement of your arm outwards away from your stomach. Your arm should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S103	External rotation	Resisted external rotation door frame	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and resist the movement of your arm outwards away from your stomach by pushing against a door frame. Your arm should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S104	External Rotation, dumbbell all	External rotation with dumbbell	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and turn your arm outwards while holding a dumbbell. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S105	Internal Rotation, dumbbell all	Internal rotation with dumbbell	Tuck your elbow in, keeping it next to your body, and turn your arm inwards while holding a dumbbell. This is a strengthening exercise for the rotator cuff shoulder muscles. 
S106	All, protraction	Rhomboid stretch	Sitting upright with good posture, place both arms in front of you with hands resting on your knees. Stretch your arms out in front of you and you will feel a gentle stretch around the shoulder blades. 
S107	All, protraction	Rhomboid stretch stronger	Sitting upright with good posture, place both arms in front of you with hands resting on your knees. Stretch your arms out in front of you and you will feel a gentle stretch around the shoulder blades. To make the exercise stronger, cross your arms in front of you and gently tuck your chin down. 
S108	retraction, dumbbell all, elbow flexion, posture all	Single arm bent-over row with dumbbell	Lean forwards to a 45 degree angle, and pull a weight backwards with one hand keeping your elbow tucked in close to your body. To make the exercise harder, stand on one leg. This is a back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S109	retraction, dumbbell all, elbow flexion, posture all	Double arm bent over row with dumbbell	Lean forwards to a 45 degree angle, and pull weights backwards with two hands keeping your elbows tucked in. You can use a barbell if you prefer. This is a back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S110	retraction, exercise band all, elbow flexion, posture all	Single arm bent-over row with band	Lean forwards to a 45 degree angle, and pull a band backwards with one hand keeping your elbow tucked in. To progress the exercise, stand on one leg. This is a back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S111	retraction, exercise band all, elbow flexion, posture all	Double arm bent over row with band	Lean forwards to a 45 degree angle, and pull a band backwards with one two hands keeping your elbows tucked in. This is a back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S112	retraction, posture all	Standing/Sitting retraction	Standing/sitting, with good posture, pull your arms backwards while squeezing your shoulder blades together, and joining your hands. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades. 
S113	retraction, posture all	Standing/Sitting retraction 2	Standing/sitting, with good posture, pull your arms backwards while squeezing your shoulder blades together. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades. 
S114	retraction, posture all	Lying retraction	Lie face down, with your arms by your side. Raise your arms behind you, and squeeze your shoulder blades inwards. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades. 
S115	retraction, posture all	Lying retraction arms extended	Lie face down, and take your arms out to your side. Squeeze your shoulder blades together lifting your arms just 5-10 cm from the floor. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades, and in the backs of your arms. 
S116	retraction, flexion, abduction, stabilisation, other, core all, lumbar spine all	Press-up, kneeling	Position yourself in a press-up position, on your knees, with your arms straight. Drop your chest towards the floor by bending your elbows. Return to the start position. This is a chest, back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S117	retraction, flexion, abduction, stabilisation, other, core all, lumbar spine all	Press-up	Position yourself in a press-up position, with your arms straight. Drop your chest towards the floor by bending the elbows. Return to the start position. This is a chest, back and shoulder strengthening exercise. 
S118	Stabilisation	Sitting stabilisation	Sitting down on a bench, rest both hands on the bench, supporting your body slightly. Gently lean on one side, putting gentle but increasing weight through one arm and shoulder, and repeat to the other side. This exercise will improve stability to the small muscles around your shoulder. 
S119	Stabilisation, retraction	Standing stabilisation	Start two feet away from the wall, rest both palms flat against the wall, and go into a push-up position. Squeeze your shoulder blades as you go into this position. You can make the exercise more challenging by either rocking gently from side to side, or by standing further from the wall. This exercise will improve stability to the small muscles around your shoulder. 
S120	Stabilisation, Swiss ball all, core all, lumbar spine all	SB stabilisation	Kneel down, and place both hands on a Swiss ball all. Support your body weight keeping your arms slightly bent. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulders.  
S121	Stabilisation, Swiss ball all shoulder, core all, lumbar spine all	SB stabilisation one handed	Kneel down, and place one hand on a Swiss ball all. Support your body weight keeping your arm slightly bent. To make the exercise harder, bend your elbow more. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulder. 
S122	Stabilisation	Seated push up	Sitting on a bench, with your fingers facing outwards, and the weight going through your arms/shoulders, lift yourself up just 1 cm from the bench. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulders. 
S123	Stabilisation, Swiss ball all, core all, lumbar spine all	SB press-up hold	Go into a press-up position, and place both hands on a Swiss ball all. Bend the elbows slightly, and hold this position. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulder. 
S124	Stabilisation, Swiss ball all shoulder	Arm push against SB	With a straight arm, push against a Swiss ball all on the wall. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulder. 
S125	Stabilisation, goof ball	Arm push against goof ball	With a straight arm, push against a goof ball on the wall. This is a great exercise to improve stability to your shoulder. 
S126	Stabilisation, other	Scapular depression	Keeping your feet on the floor, and your hands gripped to the side of the chair (with the arms straight), lift the bottom off the chair (i.e. upwards). You should feel a muscular contraction at the bottom of your shoulder blades. 
S127	Stabilisation, other	Scapular setting	"To ""set"" your shoulder blades, imagine you are wearing you are wearing a v-neck t-shirt back to front. Now pull your shoulder blades downwards and inwards as shown in the diagram, and hold this position. Keep your chin up and maintain good posture. "
S128	Other, retraction	Shoulder shrugs up	Shrug your shoulders upwards, towards the ceiling, to increase strength in your upper shoulder muscles (upper trapezius). 
S129	Other, retraction	Shoulder shrugs back	Shrug your shoulders backwards, squeezing your shoulder blades together. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades (rhomboid and shoulder blade muscles). 
S130	Other, retraction	Shoulder shrugs up with dumbbell	Shrug your shoulders upwards towards the ceiling while holding a dumbbell, to increase strength in your upper shoulder muscles (upper trapezius).. 
S131	Other, retraction	Shoulder shrugs back with dumbbell	Shrug your shoulders backwards, squeezing your shoulder blades together, while holding a dumbbell. You will feel a muscular contraction around and between your shoulder blades (rhomboid and shoulder blade muscles).
S132	Other, retraction, protraction	Chicken wings	Place your hands on your hips, and pull your elbows backwards, and then forwards, as if you were making chicken wing movements. This is a useful mobility exercise for your shoulders. 
S133	Other, elbow flexion, elbow extension	Throwing	Gently perform a throwing movement. This will help improve mobility, co-ordination and function to your shoulder. 
S134	Other, elbow flexion, elbow extension, exercise band all	Throwing with band	Gently perform a throwing movement using the band as resistance. This will help improve mobility, co-ordination, strength and function to your shoulder.
S135	Other	Traction	Place a rolled up towel in your armpit, and let your arm hang down by your side. Grasp your wrist/forearm and gently pull your arm downwards towards the floor. The movement is quite subtle so dont yank it too hard! 
S136	Dumbbell all	Serratus Anterior DB punch	Lying on your back, holding a dumbbell in each hand, push the dumbbell upwards towards the ceiling. Make sure you keep your elbows straight, and as you push them upwards, your shoulder blades will lift off the floor. Strengthening the serratus anterior muscle will help to stabilise your shoulder blade when you elevate your arm. 
S137	Other	Sleeping position	Lying on your comfortable side (i.e. the non-affected shoulder), place a folded pillow under your sore arm. You can also place a pillow behind your back to help alert you if you try to turn over on to your bad shoulder in the night. 
S138	Extension, abduction, retraction, posture all	Decline cable pull	Stand up facing a cable machine, hold the handle of the cable above shoulder level, and pull the cable backwards and declined in a line with the opposite arm. Squeeze your shoulder blade at the end of the movement. Control the return of the cable to the start position. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder. 
S139	Flexion, abduction 	Cable push one direction	Stand facing away from a cable machine, grasp the handle at shoulder level, and push in a straight line. Make sure you keep your elbow up in line with your shoulder. You can also use the opposite arm to guide you. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder. 
S140	Flexion, abduction, co-ordination all	Cable push multi-direction	Stand facing away from a cable machine, grasp the handle at shoulder level, and push in different directions (push high, push low, push to the side etc). Make sure you keep your elbow up in line with your shoulder. You can also use the opposite arm to guide you. This is a strengthening exercise for your shoulder. 
S141	Advice	Ice tip of shoulder (sitting)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S142	Advice	Heat tip of shoulder (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S143	Advice	Ice lateral shoulder (sitting)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S144	Advice	Heat lateral shoulder (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S145	Advice	Ice tip of shoulder (supine)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S146	Advice	Heat tip of shoulder (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S147	Advice	Ice lateral shoulder (supine)	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
S148	Advice	Heat lateral shoulder (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle (make sure you wrap it in a thin towel) over the tip of your shoulder.
			
Elbow			
E001	Flexion	Elbow flexion	Bend your elbow. This will help mobilise your elbow joint. 
E002	Flexion	Elbow flexion overpressure	Bend your elbow, and when you get to the end of range of the movement, gently apply some overpressure using your other hand. This exercise will help improve mobility to your elbow. 
E003	Flexion	Elbow flexion passive	Resting your elbow on your thigh, use your opposite arm to bend your elbow. Try to keep your elbow being bent as relaxed as possible. This exercise will help improve mobility to your elbow.  
E004	Flexion, dumbbell all	Elbow flexion DB	Bend your elbow while holding a dumbbell. This is a strengthening exercise for your elbow and upper arm (biceps muscle).
E005	Flexion, dumbbell all	Isolated elbow flexion DB	Resting your armpit against an inclined bench, bend your elbow while holding a dumbbell. This is a strengthening exercise for the upper arm muscle (biceps). 
E006	Flexion, exercise band all	Elbow flexion band	Stand on one end of an exercise band, and hold the other end, then bend your elbow. This is a strengthening exercise for the upper arm muscle (biceps). 
E007	Flexion	Elbow flexion hammer	Imagine you are holding a hammer (the thumb will point towards the elbow), and bend your elbow. This will help mobilise your elbow joint
E008	Flexion, dumbbell all	Elbow flexion hammer DB	Hold a dumbbell the same way you would hold a hammer, and bend your elbow. This will strengthen an important muscle around the elbow, the brachioradialis. 
E009	Flexion, dumbbell all	Isolated elbow flexion hammer DB	Hold a dumbbell the same way you would hold a hammer, and resting your armpit against an inclined bench, bend your elbow. This will strengthen an important muscle around the elbow, the brachioradialis. 
E010	Flexion, exercise band all	Elbow flexion hammer band	Imagine you are holding a hammer (the thumb will point towards the elbow), and bend your elbow while grasping an exercise band. This will strengthen an important muscle around the elbow, the brachioradialis. 
E011	Flexion	Elbow flexion barbell	Bend your elbows while holding a barbell. Make sure the hands are evenly placed on the barbell. This is a strengthening exercise for your elbow and upper arm (biceps muscle).
E012	Flexion, pronation/supination	Elbow flexion pronation	Bend your arm to 90 degrees, and rotate your forearm up and down. This will help mobilise your elbow joint. 
E013	Flexion, pronation/supination, dumbbell all	Elbow flexion pronation DB	Bend your arm to 90 degrees, and holding a weight or a dumbbell, rotate your forearm up and down. This will strengthen the muscles around the elbow. 
E014	Flexion, pronation/supination, exercise band all	Elbow flexion pronation band	Bend your arm to 90 degrees, and holding a band in your other hand, rotate your forearm to feel tension in the band. This will strengthen the muscles around the elbow. 
E015	Extension	Elbow extension	Straighten your elbow. This will help mobilise your elbow joint.
E016	Extension	Elbow extension overpressure	Rest your elbow on your thigh, and straighten your arm as much as possible. Apply overpressure using your other hand. You will feel a stretch in the biceps muscle which will help the ability to straighten your arm.
E017	Extension	Elbow extension passive	Resting your elbow on your thigh, use your opposite arm to straighten your elbow. Try to keep your elbow as relaxed as possible. This will help mobilise your elbow joint.
E018	Extension, pronation/supination, wrist flexion	Forearm extensor stretch	Hold your arm out in front of you, straighten it, rotate your arm inwards (so your elbow crease faces down towards the floor) and bend your wrist back. This exercise stretches the forearm extensor muscles, and can help with tennis elbow pain and other repetitive strain injuries. 
E019	Extension, wrist extension	Forearm flexor table stretch	Place your hand on a table with your fingers pointing towards you, and straighten your arm. This exercise helps stretch the forearm flexor muscles, and can help with repetitive strain injuries to the wrist and elbow, as well as golfer's elbow. 
E020	Extension, wrist extension	Forearm flexor table stretch both hands	Place your hands on a table with your fingers pointing towards you, and straighten your arms. This exercise helps stretch the forearm flexor muscles, and can help with repetitive strain injuries to the wrist and elbow, as well as golfer's elbow.  
E021	Extension, wrist extension	Forearm flexor wall stretch	Place your hand on a wall with your fingers pointing down towards the floor, and straighten your arm. This exercise helps stretch the forearm flexor muscles, and can help with repetitive strain injuries to the wrist and elbow, as well as golfer's elbow. 
E022	Extension, wrist extension	Forearm flexor wall stretch both hands	Place your hands on a table with your fingers pointing down towards the floor, and straighten your arms. This exercise helps stretch the forearm flexor muscles, and can help with repetitive strain injuries to the wrist and elbow, as well as golfer's elbow. 
E023	Extension, wrist extension	Forearm flexor stretch standing	Straighten your arm out in front of you, and pull your fingers back (using your other hand). The crease of your elbow should be facing towards the ceiling and fingers pointing down. This exercise helps stretch the forearm flexor muscles, and can help with repetitive strain injuries to the wrist and elbow, as well as golfer's elbow. 
E024	Extension, dumbbell all	Triceps extension standing DB	Hold a dumbbell, and extend your arm above your head. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arm. 
E025	Extension, exercise band all	Triceps extension standing band	Hold an exercise band, and extend your arm above your head. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arm. 
E026	Extension, exercise band all	Triceps extension standing band 2	Hold an exercise band with one hand in front of your chest, and extend your other hand to feel tension in the band. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arm. 
E027	Extension, exercise band all	Triceps extension standing band 3	Hold an exercise band in one hand straight in front of you, and extend your other arm. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arm. 
E028	Extension	Triceps extension standing plate	Hold a weight plate, and extend your arm above your head. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arms. 
E029	Extension, medicine ball	Triceps extension standing medicine ball	Hold a medicine ball, and extend your arms above your head. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arms. 
E030	Extension, dumbbell all	Triceps extension lying DB	Lying flat on your back, hold a dumbbell with both hands, and extend your arms above your head. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arms. 
E031	Extension	Triceps extension lying barbell	Lying flat on your back, hold a barbell with both hands, and extend your arms above your head. The closer together your hands are, the more you will work the triceps (the muscle in the upper arm). 
E032	Extension, exercise band all	Triceps extension standing both hands band	Hold an exercise tube or band with both hands and wrap it around a chair, and straighten your arms creating a resistance in the band. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arms. 
E033	Extension	Triceps extension standing both hands cable	Hold a small bar on a cable pull machine with both hands, and straighten your arms. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arms. 
E034	Extension	Triceps dips	Holding on to a bench with your fingers facing backwards, bend your elbows to drop your body weight down below the bench. This exercise predominantly strengthens the triceps muscle at the back and side of your upper arm. It also strengthens the posterior shoulder and scapular muscles. 
E035	Pronation/supination, dumbbell all	Supination and Pronation DB straight arm	Hold a dumbbell with a straight arm, and rotate your forearm outwards and then inwards. You may find the movement more specific if you hold your upper arm with your other hand. Keep your shoulder as still as possible. This exercise strengthens the small muscles in the forearm, elbow and also the upper arm. 
E036	Pronation/supination, dumbbell all	Supination and Pronation DB	Hold a dumbbell, let your arm hang to your side, and rotate your forearm outwards and then inwards. Keep your shoulder as still as possible. This exercise strengthens the small muscles in the forearm, elbow and also the upper arm. 
E037	Other	Ice for medial elbow pain	Use an ice pack or pack of frozen peas (wrapped in a thin towel) over the inside of your elbow. This can be useful for golfer's elbow, as well as other pathologies to the elbow. 
E038	Other	Ice for lateral elbow pain	Use an ice pack or pack of frozen peas (wrapped in a thin towel) over the outside of your elbow. This can be useful for tennis elbow and repetitive strain injuries, as well as other pathologies to the elbow. 
E039	Other	Self massage for medial elbow pain	With your arm supported on your thigh, gently massage along your forearm muscles between your elbow and wrist. This helps reduce tension in the forearm muscles. 
E040	Other	Self massage for lateral elbow pain	With your arm supported on your thigh, gently massage along your forearm muscles between your elbow and wrist. This helps reduce tension in the forearm muscles. 
E041	Other	Tennis Elbow Support	"Tennis elbow supports are usually Velcro straps, and you should wear the strap just under your elbow. This creates ""a false origin"" to the muscle, offloading strain from the tendon that causes the tennis elbow pain. "
E042	Other	Compression strap	Use a tubigrip or cohesive compression bandage and wrap it around your elbow. It should be supportive, but not too hard to cause tingling in your fingers. 
E043	Proprioception, shoulder flexion, shoulder abduction, elbow flexion, elbow extension	Ball bounce	Practice bouncing a Swiss ball all up and down, concentrating on control and movement of the elbow and shoulder. To make the exercise harder, practice bouncing in different directions. This exercise aids control and proprioception in the arm. 
E044	Other	Heat for medial elbow pain	Use a heat pack or hot water bottle (wrapped in a thin towel) over the inside of your elbow. This can be useful for golfer's elbow, as well as other pathologies to the elbow. 
E045	Other	Heat for lateral elbow pain	Use a heat pack or hot water bottle (wrapped in a thin towel) over the outside of your elbow. This can be useful for tennis elbow and repetitive strain injuries, as well as other pathologies to the elbow. 
			
Wrist			
W001	Flexion	Wrist flexion	Bend your wrist. This exercise will help improve the mobility of your wrist. 
W002	Flexion	Wrist flexion passive	Use your hand to bend your own wrist. Make sure you keep  your wrist relaxed. This is a passive exercise used to improve the mobility of your wrist and stretch the forearm muscles. 
W003	Flexion	Wrist flexion resisted	Resist bending your wrist. Your wrist should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist and elbow. 
W004	Flexion	Wrist flexion stretch	Push your hand downwards to create a stretch in the top of the wrist, and hold. This exercise will help improve the mobility of your wrist, and stretch the forearm muscles. 
W005	Flexion, exercise band all	Wrist flexion band	Hold an exercise band, and bend your wrist to create resistance in the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W006	Flexion, dumbbell all	Wrist flexion dumbbell	Hold a dumbbell, and bend your wrist. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W007	Flexion, deviation	Wrist flexion with deviation stretch	1) Bend your wrist. 2) Move your hand to the side towards your little finger to create a stretch in the forearm. 3) Hold. This exercise will stretch the forearm muscles. 
W008	Flexion	Eccentric wrist flexion	Rest your arm on a table with your palm facing down, and hold a 1-2kg dumbbell. Lift your hand upwards, and then with a controlled movement let the weight pull your hand back down. At the bottom, repeat by lifting your own hand upwards again, and then letting the weight pull your hand back down. Eccentric exercises are a very effective way to rehabilitate the wrist, forearm and elbow, and this can be especially useful for tennis elbow. 
W009	Flexion, extension	Wrist flexion and extension	Relax your forearm on a table, with your hand hanging over the edge of the table. Bend your wrist downwards, and then upwards. This exercise can be used to improve the mobility of the wrist. 
W010	Extension	Wrist extension	Extend your wrist. This exercise will help improve the mobility of your wrist. 
W011	Extension	Wrist extension passive 	Use your hand to extend your own wrist. Make sure you keep your wrist relaxed. This is a passive exercise used to improve the mobility of your wrist, and to stretch the forearm muscles. 
W012	Extension	Wrist extension resisted 	Resist extending your wrist. Your wrist should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W013	Extension	Wrist extension stretch	Push your hand upwards, to create a stretch on the underside of your wrist, and hold. This exercise will help stretch your forearm muscles, improving the mobility of your wrist.  
W014	Extension, exercise band all	Wrist extension band	Hold an exercise band, and extend your wrist to create resistance in the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W015	Extension, dumbbell all	Wrist extension dumbbell	Hold a dumbbell, and extend your wrist. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W016	Extension	Eccentric wrist extension	Rest your arm on a table with your palm facing up, and hold a 1-2kg dumbbell. Lift your hand upwards, and then with a controlled movement let the weight pull your hand back down. At the bottom, repeat by lifting your own hand upwards again, and then letting the weight pull the hand back down. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, elbow and forearm and can be useful for golfer's elbow. 
W017	Deviation	Radial deviation	Move your wrist to the side in the direction of your thumb. This exercise will help improve mobility at your wrist. 
W018	Deviation	Ulnar deviation	Move your wrist to the side in the direction of your little finger. This exercise will help improve mobility at your wrist.
W019	Deviation	Ulnar and radial deviation	Deviate your hand to one side, and then the other. This exercise will help improve mobility at your wrist.
W020	Deviation	Radial deviation passive	Use your hand to move your wrist to the side in the direction of your thumb. Make sure you keep your wrist relaxed. This exercise will help improve mobility at your wrist.
W021	Deviation	Ulnar deviation passive	Use your hand to move your wrist to the side in the direction of your little finger. Make sure you keep your wrist relaxed. This exercise will help improve mobility at your wrist.
W022	Deviation	Radial deviation resisted	Resist moving your hand in the direction of your thumb. The hand should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow. 
W023	Deviation	Ulnar deviation resisted 	Resist moving your hand in the direction of your little finger. The hand should not move. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W024	Deviation	Radial deviation stretch	Push your hand to the side of your thumb, to create a stretch on the outside of the wrist. 
W025	Deviation	Ulnar deviation stretch 	Push your hand to the side of your little finger, to create a stretch on the inside of your wrist and forearm. 
W026	Deviation, exercise band all	Radial deviation band	Hold an exercise band, and deviate your wrist to the side of your thumb, to create resistance in the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W027	Deviation, exercise band all	Ulnar deviation band 	Hold an exercise band, and deviate your wrist to the side of your little finger, to create resistance in the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W028	Deviation, dumbbell all	Radial deviation dumbbell	Hold a dumbbell, and deviate your wrist to the side of your thumb. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W029	Deviation, dumbbell all	Ulnar deviation dumbbell	Hold a dumbbell, and deviate your wrist to the side of your little finger. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
W030	Deviation, dumbbell all	Radial and ulnar deviation dumbbell	Hold a dumbbell, and deviate your wrist to one side and then to the other side. This is a strengthening exercise for the wrist, forearm and elbow.
			
Hand/Fingers/Thumb			
HFT001	Flexion	Thumb  flexion active CM	Bend your thumb downwards from the main thumb joint. This exercise will help mobilise your thumb. 
HFT002	Flexion	Thumb flexion active MP	Place your index finger underneath the middle of your injured thumb. Bend the top joint of your thumb. This exercise will help mobilise your thumb. 
HFT003	Flexion	Thumb flexion assisted CM	Place your finger above the main joint of your injured thumb. Gently bend the joint. This exercise will help mobilise your thumb. 
HFT004	Flexion	Thumb flexion assisted MP	Use your thumb and finger to hold the end of your injured thumb. Gently bend the joint. This exercise will help mobilise your thumb. 
HFT005	Flexion	Resisted thumb flexion	Place your thumb on the tip two fingers. Push downwards against the resistance of your fingers. This exercise will help increase the strength of your thumb tendons. 
HFT006	Flexion	Thumb flexion - band	With your palm facing downwards, wrap an elastic band around the tip of your thumb. With your free hand hold the other end of the band. Move your thumb downwards against the resistance of the band. This exercise will help strengthen your thumb. 
HFT007	Flexion	Finger flexion assisted DIP	Place your thumb and finger above the top joint of your injured finger. Gently bend the joint to help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT008	Flexion	Finger flexion PIP	Use your thumb and finger to gently bend the middle joint of your injured finger. This exercise will help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT009	Flexion	Finger flexion MCP	Place your thumb and finger above the bottom joint of your injured finger. Gently bend the whole finger joint. This exercise will help mobilise your finger. 
HFT010	Flexion	Finger flexion active isolated	Place your injured hand on a flat surface with your palm facing upwards. Hold all but one finger down. Bend the remaining finger up to help isolate the tendons and mobilise the joint. 
HFT011	Flexion	Finger flexion MCP active	Bend your injured finger from the main finger joint knuckle. This exercise will help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT012	Flexion	Finger flexion PIP active	Place your thumb underneath the middle of your injured finger. Bend the middle joint of your finger. This exercise will help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT013	Flexion	Finger flexion DIP active	Place your thumb underneath the top joint of your injured finger. Bend the top joint of your finger. This exercise will help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT014	Flexion	Finger flexion active	Make a fist with your hand. Hold this position, and then relax the fingers. Use this exercise to increase finger mobility, especially if you have difficulty gripping. 
HFT015	Flexion	Finger flexion putty	Hold some putty in the palm of your hand. Squeeze the putty with your fingers, then release. Use this exercise to increase finger strength and grip. 
HFT016	Extension	Thumb extension stretch	Use your finger to bend your thumb backwards to feel a stretch at the base of your thumb. This exercise will help improve thumb flexibility. 
HFT017	Extension	Thumb extension - band	Place an elastic band around your fingers and thumb.  Move your thumb away from your fingers against the resistance of the band to strengthen your thumb tendons. 
HFT018	Extension	Thumb extension - resisted	Place your index and middle finger around your injured thumb. Bring your thumb upwards against the resistance. This exercise will help increase the strength of your thumb tendons.
HFT019	Extension	Finger extension DIP assisted	Bend the tip of your finger backwards and hold. This exercise will help mobilise your finger joint. 
HFT020	Extension	Finger extension MCP assisted	Bend your whole finger backwards and hold. This exercise will help mobilise your finger. 
HFT021	Extension	Finger extension active	Place your injured hand on a flat surface, lift all your fingers upwards off the surface together. Use this exercise to strengthen your finger tendons. 
HFT022	Extension	Finger extension isolated	Place your injured hand on a flat surface, lift your injured finger off the surface to mobilise and strengthen it.
HFT023	Extension	Finger extension resisted	Place your injured hand on a flat surface, and hold down one finger. Try to lift your finger up against the resistance. This exercise will strengthen your finger tendons. 
HFT024	Flexion	Resisted finger flexion DIP	Place one finger on the tip of your injured finger. Push your injured finger downwards while you try to hold the finger straight. Use this exercise to strengthen your finger. 
HFT025	Flexion	Resisted finger flexion PIP	Place one finger above the middle joint of your injured finger. Push your injured finger downwards while you try to hold the finger straight. Use this exercise to strengthen your finger. 
HFT026	Flexion	Resisted finger flexion MCP	Place one finger above the bottom joint of your injured finger. Push your injured finger downwards while you try to hold the finger straight. Use this exercise to strengthen your finger. 
HFT027	Abduction	Finger abduction active	Start with your fingers together. Spread all your fingers wide apart from each other. Use this exercise to stretch your fingers out. 
HFT028	Abduction	Finger/thumb abduction band	Wrap an elastic band around your fingers and thumb. Pull your fingers and thumb apart from each other, against the resistance of the band. This exercise will help strengthen your joints. 
HFT029	Abduction	Finger abduction band	Place and elastic band around all your fingers. Spread your fingers apart against the resistance of the band. This exercise will help strengthen your fingers. 
HFT030	Thumb opposition	Thumb opposition - band	Place an elastic band around the tip of your thumb. With your free hand hold the other end of the band. Move your thumb towards your little finger, against the resistance of the band. This will help strengthen your thumb. 
HFT031	Thumb opposition	Thumb opposition - resisted	Place a finger under your injured thumb. Move your thumb against the resistance towards your little finger. This will help strengthen your thumb. 
HFT032	Thumb opposition	Thumb opposition - proprioception	Move your thumb to touch the tip of your index finger, pinch them together, then release. Repeat for every finger. To progress, do it with your eyes shut. This will help build co-ordination in your hand. 
HFT033	Other	Thenar eminence massage	With your injured palm facing upwards, massage the fleshy bit at the base of the injured thumb with your other hand. This will help loosen up some knots in your muscle. 
HFT034	Other	Thumb web space massage	With your injured palm downwards, massage the space between your thumb and index finger with your other hand. This will help loosen up some knots in your muscle.
HFT035	Other	Ice to fingers/thumb	Place an ice bag or pack of frozen peas over your injured fingers or point of most swelling. This will help reduce swelling and pain. 
HFT036	Other	Heat to fingers/thumb	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the injured area to stimulate blood flow. 
HFT037	Other	Hot/cold therapy	Fill up a bowl of warm/hot water, place your hand in the water for 2 minutes. Refill the bowl with cold water, place your hands in the cold water for 2 minutes. Repeat with warm/hot water again. Contrast bathing is a very effective way at reducing inflammation and pain. 
HFT038	Other	Putty	Place some putty between both your palms. Remould the putty with your palms and fingers to increase the strength of your fingers. 
			
Lumbar Spine			
L001	Flexion, thoracic flexion	Toe touch	Keeping your legs straight, touch your toes (or go down as far as feels comfortable). This will increase mobility in your spine, and also stretch your hamstrings. 
L002	Flexion, knee extension	Waiter's bow	Pinch some skin at the base of your spine, and slowly bend forwards. As soon as you are unable to keep the skin pinched, stop and feel the stretch in your hamstrings. 
L003	Flexion, thoracic flexion, knee extension	Sitting forward hamstring and spine stretch	Sitting down, keep your legs straight in front of you, and reach forwards to touch your toes. Go as far as feels comfortable. You should feel a stretch in the back of the thighs/hamstrings. 
L004	Flexion, advice, posture all, thoracic advice	Avoid forward bending	Be careful when you bend forwards! Repetitive forward bending can aggravate underlying disc problems. Keep your back straight and bend your knees to take a lot of strain off the spine.  
L005	Flexion, thoracic flexion	Cat stretch	"Start in a neutral four point position, and round the back from an arched position. It should feel like a gentle stretch to your lower back. Don't over-arch your back; keep it comfortable. "
L006	Flexion	Single leg back stretch	Lie flat on your back, and bend your knee towards your chest. Hold this position and feel a gentle stretch in your back. If you get any groin pain while doing this exercise, stop and inform your therapist. 
L007	Flexion, hip flexion	Double leg back stretch	Lie flat on your back, and bend your knees towards your chest. Hold this position and feel a gentle stretch in your back. If you get any groin pain while doing this exercise, stop and inform your therapist. 
L008	Flexion	Sit-up crunch	Lie on your back with your knees bent, and perform a crunch by sitting-up and reaching your fingers towards your knees. You should make sure your shoulder blades just lift off the floor. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal muscles. 
L009	Flexion	Full flexion sit-up	Lie on your back with your knees bent, and perform a full sit-up by lifting your torso off the floor and towards your knees. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal muscles. 
L010	Flexion, Swiss ball all	SB sit-up	Lie on your back on a Swiss ball all, and perform a crunch by lifting your  shoulder blades off the ball. It is fine to return by dropping just below the horizontal. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal muscles. 
L011	Flexion, Swiss ball all	Sit-up with feet on SB	Lie on your back on the floor, with your feet on a Swiss ball all, and perform a crunch by lifting your shoulder blades off the floor. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal muscles. 
L012	Flexion	Boxer's sit-up	Lift one leg off the floor a few inches, and the other off the floor with your knee flexed as shown in the picture. Perform a crunch by touching your hand to your foot. This is a tough sit-up! But you can make it easier by moving your foot closer to you, or away from you to make the exercise harder. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal muscles and oblique muscles. 
L013	Flexion, rotation 	Oblique crunch	Lie on your back with your knees bent, and perform a crunch by sitting-up and reaching for the outside part of your knee. You should make sure your shoulder blades just lift off the floor. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
L014	Flexion, rotation 	Oblique crunch 2	Lie on your back with your knees bent and resting to one side of your body, and perform a crunch by sitting-up and reaching for the outside part of your knee with your elbow on the same side. You should make sure your shoulder blades just lift off the floor. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
L015	Flexion, rotation	Boxer's oblique crunch	Lie on your back with your knees bent, and perform a crunch by moving your elbow towards the opposite knee. You should make sure your shoulder blades just lift off the floor. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
L016	Flexion, thoracic flexion	Sitting forward hang	Sitting down, round your back and let your arms hang in front of you. You should feel a gentle stretch over your spine. 
L017	Flexion, thoracic flexion	Flexion stretch	Sitting crossed legged, round your back forwards and reach forwards. You should feel a stretch in your lower back and buttocks. 
L018	Flexion, rotation, thoracic flexion	Flexion stretch with rotation	Sitting crossed legged, round your back forwards and reach to the side. You will feel a stretch in your lower back, buttocks and side slightly. 
L019	Flexion, hip flexion, knee extension	Single straight leg raise	Lie flat on your back, and lift a straight leg as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will stretch the hamstring. 
L020	Flexion, hip flexion, knee extension	Bilateral straight leg raise	Lie flat on your back, and lift both straight legs as far as feels comfortable. This exercise will stretch the hamstrings, although to get your legs to this position will also use the lower abdominal muscles.  
L021	Flexion, extension, core all, stability	Pelvic tilt lying	Lie flat on your back, and engage the deep core muscles by pulling your stomach downwards, while flattening your spine against the floor. 
L022	Flexion, core all, stability	Pelvic tilt blood pressure cuff	Lie flat on your back, and place a blood pressure cuff (inflated to 30mmHg) under your lower back. Engage the deep core muscles by pulling your stomach downwards, while flattening your spine against the floor. Try to increase the pressure in the cuff and maintain the control of the pressure, so do not let it fluctuate too much. Your therapist will advise you how much pressure to aim for. This exercise strengthens the deep abdominal muscles. 
L023	Flexion, extension	Pelvic tilt sitting	Sit down with good posture, and tilt the pelvis backwards (i.e. flatten the spine against the chair). Return to the start position (arching your back - known as a lumbar lordosis). This exercise strengthens the deep abdominal muscles. 
L024	Flexion, rotation, core all	Rotation with flexion	Lie flat on your back, and contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your tummy inwards. Bend your hips to 90 degrees, keep your knees together, and rotate the spine. You do not need to get your knees to the floor, keep it within your comfort zone. This exercise works the lower abdominal muscles, while also improving mobility to the spine. 
L025	Extension, posture all	Lying on your front	Lie on your front. If you find this uncomfortable, you can place a pillow under your tummy. 
L026	Extension, posture all	Back extension with towel	Lie on your back, with a rolled up towel under your lower back. To make the exercise stronger, bend your knees. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis).  
L027	Extension, foam roller all, posture all	Back extension with foam roller	Lie on your back, with a foam roller under your lower back. To make the exercise stronger, bend your knees. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis).  
L028	Extension, thoracic extension, posture all	Back extension gentle	Lie on your front, and rest on your forearms. Your back will be gently arched. Start gently with this exercise as it can cause a little bit of back stiffness when you first begin. 
L029	Extension, thoracic extension, posture all	Back extension medium	Lie on your front, and rest on your forearms. Straighten your arms to a 90 degree position as shown. Your back will be arched. Start gently with this exercise as it can cause a little bit of back stiffness when you first begin. 
L030	Extension, thoracic extension, posture all	Back extension strong	Lie on your front, and rest on your forearms. Straighten your arms making your back very arched. Start gently with this exercise as it can cause a little bit of back stiffness when you first begin. 
L031	Extension, stability	Floor superman one arm	Lie on your front, and lift your straight arm in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back muscles.  
L032	Extension, stability	Floor superman opposite	Lie on your front, and lift your opposite arm and leg, keeping them straight. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and buttock muscles. 
L033	Extension, stability	Floor superman arm and same side leg	Lie on your front, and lift your arm and same-side leg, keeping them straight. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and buttock muscles. 
L034	Extension, stability	Floor superman two arms	Lie on your front, and lift both arms straight in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and abdominal muscles. 
L035	Extension, stability	Floor superman one leg	Lie on your front, and lift your straight leg up behind you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and buttock muscles. 
L036	Extension, stability	Floor superman two legs	Lie on your front, and lift your legs up behind you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and buttock muscles. 
L037	Extension, stability	Floor superman two legs, one arm	Lie on your front, and lift your legs up behind you, and one arm in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and buttock muscles. 
L038	Extension, stability	Floor superman two arms, one leg	Lie on your front, and lift one leg behind you, and two arms in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back, abdominal and buttock muscles. 
L039	Extension, stability	Floor superman two legs two arms	Lie on your front, and lift your legs up behind you, and your arms in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back, abdominal and buttock muscles. 
L040	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman one arm	Lie on your front on a SB, and keeping your arm straight lift it in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back muscles and improving core control.  
L041	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman opposite	Lie on your front on a SB, and lift your opposite arm and leg, keeping them straight. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and gluteal muscles and improving core control.  
L042	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman arm and same side leg	Lie on your front on a SB, and lift your arm and leg (same-side), keeping them straight. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and gluteal muscles and improving core control.  
L043	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman two arms	Lie on your front on a SB, and lift both arms straight in front of you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and abdominal muscles and improving core control.  
L044	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman one leg	Lie on your front on a SB, and keeping your leg straight lift it up behind you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and gluteal muscles and improving core control.  
L045	Extension, stability, Swiss ball all	SB superman two legs	Lie on your front on a SB, and keeping your legs straight lift them up behind you. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back and gluteal muscles and improving core control.  
L046	Extension, stability	SB no arms no legs	Lie on your front, and carefully lift both arms and legs. It will be difficult to maintain stability, so be careful and put an arm or leg out to stop you falling off. This exercise helps to arch your lower back (to create what is known as a lumbar lordosis) while strengthening the lower back, abdominal and gluteal muscles and improving core control.  
L047	Extension, stability, knee extension, hip extension, core all	Supine bridge basic	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, lift your back upwards. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L048	Extension, stability, knee extension, hip extension	Supine bridge medium	Lie flat on your back with your arms across your chest, and with your knees bent. Lift your back upwards. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L049	Extension, stability, knee extension, hip extension	Supine bridge hard	Lie flat on your back with your arms by your side, and with your knees bent. Lift your back upwards and straighten one leg. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L050	Extension, stability, knee extension, hip extension	Supine bridge advanced	Lying flat on your back with your arms across your chest, and with your knees bent. Lift your back upwards and straighten one leg. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L051	Extension, stability, core all, Swiss ball all, hip extension	SB supine bridge basic	"Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a Swiss ball all, and your arms by your side (palms face down). Lift your back upwards. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your body (more under your legs), and harder; away from your body (more under your heels). This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles.  "
L052	Extension, stability, core all, Swiss ball all, hip extension	SB supine bridge medium	"Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a Swiss ball all, and your arms crossed over your chest. Lift your back upwards. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your body (more under your legs), and harder; away from your body (more under your heels). This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. "
L053	Extension, stability, core all, Swiss ball all, hip extension	SB supine bridge hard	Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a Swiss ball all, and your arms by your side. Lift your back upwards, and lift one leg off the ball. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your body (more under your legs), and harder, away from your body (more under your heels). This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L054	Extension, stability, core all, Swiss ball all, hip extension	SB supine bridge advanced	Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a Swiss ball all, and your arms across your chest. Lift your back upwards, and lift one leg off the ball. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your body (more under your legs), and harder, away from your body (more under your heels). This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L055	Extension, stability, core all, Swiss ball all, hip extension	SB supine bridge body extension	Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a Swiss ball all, and your arms by your side (palms face down). Lift your back upwards. Once in a comfortable position, bend your knees and lift your torso in the air. Make sure you maintain good posture and contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing your tummy towards your spine. This exercise helps to strengthen the abdominal, lower back, gluteal and hamstring muscles. 
L056	Extension	Standing extension	Standing up with good posture, extend your back by arching your spine backwards. You can place your hands in the small of your back for support if you require. Start gently, and keep the exercise within your comfort zone. 
L057	Extension	Roman chair extension	Get onto the Roman chair and start with your head next to the floor. Extend your back to the horizontal position. Return to the start position. This exercise predominantly strengthens the lower back and mid-back muscles. 
L058	Extension	Roman chair extension with MB	Get onto the Roman chair and start with your head next to the floor. Extend your back to the horizontal position while holding a medicine ball or weight. Return to the start position. This exercise predominantly strengthens the lower back and mid-back muscles. 
L059	Extension	Kneeling extension	Knee down, with your torso leaning forwards, and extend to a straight position. Return to the start position. This exercise predominantly strengthens the lower back muscles.
L060	Rotation	Lumbar rotation	Bend your knees, and keeping your feet flat on the floor, rotate your hips to one side creating a rotation through your lower back. Only go as far as feels comfortable, you do not need to get your knees to the floor. Return to the opposite side. 
L061	Rotation, flexion	Lumbar rotation feet off floor	Bend your knees, and keeping your lower legs crossed and off the floor, rotate your hips to one side creating a rotation through your lower back. Return to the opposite side. 
L062	Rotation, thoracic rotation	Lumbar rotation opposite twist	Bend your knees, and keeping your feet flat on the floor, rotate your hips to one side creating a rotation through your lower back. Only go as far as feels comfortable, you do not need to get your knees to the floor. With straight arms, rotate to the opposite side at the same time. 
L063	Rotation, thoracic rotation	Supine lumbar twist stretch	Lying flat on your back, cross one leg over the other by twisting your hips and spine. Keep your opposite arm outstretched. 
L064	Rotation, Swiss ball all	Lumbar rotation SB	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good posture, and roll your hips in a circular direction. Perform in one direction, and then the other direction. This is an excellent lower back mobility exercise.
L065	Rotation, Swiss ball all	Lumbar figure of eight rotation SB	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good posture, and roll your hips in a figure of eight pattern. Perform in one direction, and then the other direction. This is an excellent lower back mobility exercise. 
L066	Rotation, thoracic rotation	Chair rotation	Sitting down in an upright position, rotate by moving your hand towards the opposite side of the chair back-rest. This is a great exercise to do while sitting for long periods of time if you feel your back is getting stiff. 
L067	Rotation, Swiss ball all	SB lumbar twist	Lie on your back, with your legs resting on the ball. Gently twist your legs to each side while keeping your body straight. You shouldnt aim to get to the ground, keep the exercise within your comfort zone.  
L068	Rotation, Swiss ball all, core all	SB lumbar straight leg twist	Lying on your back, grasp the ball between your legs. Squeeze your core muscles, and keeping your legs as straight as possible, drop your legs to each side as far as feels comfortable.
L069	Rotation, Swiss ball all	SB rotations	Lie on your back, feet and calves on the ball, and rotate your spine (drop your hips to each side, moving the ball). Make sure you control the movement from the core muscles, so do not go too fast. 
L070	Rotation, Swiss ball all, stability, core all, thoracic rotation	Russian supine ball twist	Start by lying with your back on the ball, arms outstretched and hands together. Rotate your torso dont just twist your shoulders/arms. You will know if you are doing it correctly because your arms will remain straight. If your elbow is bending you are not rotating the torso. This is an excellent lower-upper back mobility exercise. 
L071	Rotation, thoracic rotation	Rotation standing with dowel	Standing with good posture, and holding a dowel rod behind your neck, rotate your torso to one side and then the other. To make the exercise stronger, turn your feet inwards to lock up the hips, requiring you to use more of your spine to rotate. 
L072	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion	Lumbar and thoracic side-flexion standing	Stand up straight, and run your arm along the outside of your leg. This is a good mobility exercise for the lower and upper back. 
L073	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion	Lumbar and thoracic side-flexion standing 2	Stand up straight, and run your arm along the outside of your leg and use an arm above your head to create more leverage. This is a good mobility exercise for the lower and upper back. 
L074	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion	Lumbar and thoracic side-flexion with dumbbell	Stand up straight, hold a dumbbell in each hand, and run your arm along the outside of your leg. This exercise is a gentle strengthening exercise as well as improving mobility of the spine. 
L075	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion	Lumbar and thoracic side-flexion sitting	Sitting down, side-bend your spine. This is a good mobility exercise for the upper and lower back while sat down, if you feel your back is starting to get stiff. 
L076	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion	Lumbar and thoracic side-flexion sitting 2	Sitting down, side-bend your spine and use an arm above your head to create more leverage. This is a good mobility exercise for the upper and lower back while sat down, if you feel your back is starting to get stiff. 
L077	Side-flexion	Lumbar mobilisation sitting	Sitting down, lift one foot off the ground to lift your hip, then repeat to the other side. This will create a gentle side-bend to your lower back. This is an especially good mobility exercise for people who travel long distances in a car or sit for long periods who may get a stiff lower back. 
L078	Side-flexion, thoracic side-flexion, hip adduction	ITB stretch	Standing, cross your legs, and run your arm down the side of your leg. You should feel a stretch in your back, and slightly on the outside of the opposite leg. 
L079	Side-flexion, Swiss ball all	SB side mobilisation	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good posture, and roll your hips to one side, and then to the other side. Keep the movement fluid, and maintain stability on the ball (i.e. only shift as far as feels comfortable). This exercise helps improve the mobility of the lower back. 
L080	Side-flexion, Swiss ball all	SB side-stretch	Place your feet against a wall, and lie on your side over a Swiss ball all. Side-bend your spine so you are aligned, and then return to the start position.
L081	Stability, posture all, advice, Swiss ball all	SB sitting	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture. Make sure your head is not dropping forwards, keep your eyes on the horizon line, and maintain a gentle backward curve in your lower back. Do not be surprised if you get a little achy sitting for longer than 15 minutes. Sitting on a Swiss ball all is great for posture and core control, because in most cases when you must keep good posture to maintain your centre of gravity and stay on the ball. 
L082	Stability, Swiss ball all	SB bouncing	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture. Gently bounce up and down while always keeping good posture. This exercise helps stimulate blood flow to the discs and joints in the back, as well as safely preparing the spine for compression. 
L083	Stability, Swiss ball all, hip flexion, core all	SB leg lift	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture, and hold on to the sides of the ball. Lift one leg just above the ground. To make the exercise harder, dont hold on to the side of the ball. This exercise is great for postural awareness and core control. 
L084	Stability, Swiss ball all, hip flexion, knee extension, core all	SB leg lift 2	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture, and hold on to the sides of the ball. Lift one leg just above the ground and straighten the leg. To make the exercise harder, dont hold on to the side of the ball. This exercise is great for postural awareness and core control. 
L085	Stability, Swiss ball all, hip flexion, core all	SB leg and arm lift opposite side	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture. Lift one leg just above the ground, and raise the opposite arm. To make the exercise harder, dont hold on to the side of the ball. This exercise is great for postural awareness and core control. 
L086	Stability, Swiss ball all, hip flexion, core all	SB leg and arm lift same side	Sit on a Swiss ball all with good upright posture. Lift one leg just above the ground, and raise your arm on the same side above your head. To make the exercise harder, dont hold on to the side of the ball. This exercise is great for postural awareness and core control. 
L087	Stability, core all	Neutral four point position	Go on to all fours, and make sure your hips, knees and shoulders are aligned to 90 degrees. Keep a gentle curve in your lower back. If you wish, check your posture by using a dowel rod to ensure three points of contact - your head, your upper back, and your sacrum. If you do not have a dowel rod, try a broom stick or a golf club. 
L088	Stability, core all	Tummy vacuum	Start in a neutral four point position, and suck your tummy upwards. While you are holding this position, try to breathe normally. 
L089	Stability, hip abduction	Hip abduction lying	Lying on your side, lift your leg several inches in the air. You can either hold this position, or return your leg down and then repeat the exercise. Ask your therapist which they would prefer you to do. This exercise strengthens the pelvic, gluteal, and lower back areas. 
L090	Stability, hip abduction, core all	Hip abduction lying bilateral	Lying on your side, keeping your legs together, lift your legs several inches in the air. You can either hold this position, or return your legs down and then repeat the exercise. Ask your therapist which they would prefer you to do. This exercise strengthens the pelvic, gluteal, core and lower back areas. 
L091	Stability, core all	Leg slide	Lie on your back, with both legs straight, activate your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your tummy towards the floor. Slide one heel towards your bottom. Maintain only the slightest contact with your heel on the ground. You can progress the exercise by lifting the opposite leg just a few inches off the ground, while sliding the other heel towards your bottom. This is a great core control exercise to work the abdominal muscles. 
L092	Stability	Horse-stance weight shift	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Shift your weight from one side of your body to the other side. This is a great core control exercise to work the abdominal muscles. 
L093	Stability	Horse-stance decompression	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Lift your hand and opposite knee upwards, but always keep contact with the floor, so there is no weight going through them. You will be surprised how well this works the deep abdominal muscles to improve core stability and control. 
L094	Stability	Horse-stance opposite lift	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Lift your hand and opposite knee upwards 1cm and hold this position. This is a great core stability and core control exercise to work the abdominal muscles. 
L095	Stability	Horse-stance same side lift	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Lift your hand and same side knee upwards 1cm and hold this position. This is a great core stability and core control exercise to work the abdominal muscles. 
L096	Stability	Horse-stance abduction	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Lift your elbow and knee outwards and hold this position. This is an advanced core stability and core control exercise to work the deep abdominal muscles. 
L097	Stability	Horse-stance dynamic	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Move your elbow towards your opposite knee, and return to the start position. This is an advanced core stability and core control exercise to work the deep abdominal muscles.
L098	Stability, hip extension	Horse-stance horizontal	Go on to all fours, and keep good posture. Draw your tummy inwards (towards the ceiling). Straighten your arm in front of you, and your opposite leg behind you. This is a great core stability and core control exercise to work the deep abdominal muscles. 
L099	Stability, hip extension	Backward lean kneeling	Kneeling, lean backwards. Make sure you contract your abdominal muscles by drawing your tummy inwards. Keep good alignment, so be careful not to over-arch your lower back. This exercise strengthens the core muscles. 
L100	Traction	Hanging	Hang from a bar and try to gently take the weight off your legs. Avoid using the door frame or other less secure objects to perform this exercise. Its useful for tractioning and stretching the muscles and joints across the shoulders and spine. 
L101	Traction, posture all	Neutral position lumbar decompression chair	Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a chair. Relax in this position. You can place your arms above your head if you wish. This exercise is a decompression exercise for the spine, especially useful for lumbar disc problems. 
L102	Traction, posture all	Neutral position lumbar decompression SB	Lie flat on your back, with your feet resting on a SB. Relax in this position. You can place your arms above your head if you wish. This exercise is a decompression exercise for the spine, especially useful for lumbar disc problems. 
L103	Advice	Understanding vertebrae	This is your spine. Notice how it is curved, to help absorb force. The main areas are the lumbar spine (lower back), thoracic spine (mid-upper back), and the cervical spine (neck). The curve is the neck is known as the cervical lordosis, in the upper back you have the thoracic kyphosis, and the lower back the lumbar lordosis. 
L104	Advice, posture all	Standing with good posture	Stand up straight. Ensure that your head does not drop forwards and keep your eyes on the horizon line. Keep your shoulders in a relaxed and back position, and place your hands by your side. 
L105	Advice	Ice to lower back (sitting)	Sitting on a chair, place an ice pack or packet of frozen peas over your lower back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The ice helps reduce inflammation and pain. 
L106	Advice	Heat to lower back (sitting)	Sitting on a chair, place a heat pack, wheat bag or hot water bottle over your lower back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain. 
L107	Advice	Sleeping position side	If you find sleeping uncomfortable, try lying on your side, and place a pillow between your knees. If you have leg pain or one-sided lower back pain, usually you will find it more comfortable to lie on the opposite side to your leg/back pain. 
L108	Advice	Sleeping position flat on back	You may prefer to sleep flat on your back. If you do, you may get some relief from back pain by placing a pillow under your knees. Use one or two pillows, whichever you feel is more comfortable. 
L109	Advice, posture all	Advice on bending	When you pick something up from the floor, ensure the following: 1) Go down on to one knee, or squat down. If you find it uncomfortable to go onto one knee, then put a pillow under your knee and use nearby objects such as a table or chair to support your arms. 2) Avoid bending over to make a bed, clean the bath, or wash your teeth. Think of ways to prevent bending, such as going on to one knee, or widening the legs to make a split-stance (this will drop your height several inches), or avoid picking things up from the floor unless completely necessary. 3) If you do have to bend, do not twist at the same time. 4) When bending, always brace the stomach muscles by squeezing the abdomen inwards. 
L110	Advice, posture all	Advice on lifting	When lifting: 1) Avoid lifting heavy objects. 2) Position your body square on to the object being lifted, never twist. 3) Bend the knees rather than the back. 4) contract the deep abdominal muscles - one way to do this is to squeeze your stomach inwards and hold. 5) Keep the load close to the body to reduce the weight and lever-arm. 6) Do not twist when you put the weight back down. 
L111	Advice, hip advice	Getting in and out of bed	To get in and out of bed, sit on the side of your bed, and bend the knees up onto the bed as you lower the upper body down, thus keeping the back straight. Do the opposite when coming up from lying. 
L112	Advice, hip advice	Correct way to sit down and stand up	To ensure you sit down correctly, first contract the deep abdominal muscles by squeezing the stomach inwards. Next, lean forwards onto your feet and stick your bottom out slightly to maintain the natural curve in the lower back (known as the lordosis) and then bend the legs to squat down. Make sure you keep the eyes looking forwards, do not drop the chin. To stand up from sitting, do the opposite: first contract the abdominal muscles, then maintain the curve in the lower back, and push up from the legs. 
L113	Advice, posture all	Weight belt	Weight belts are incredibly useful for providing back support, but should only be used when lifting or moving objects, rather than all the time. Its especially useful when lifting furniture, picking up chairs, or lifting boxes. It can also be used to help prevent forward bending of the spine. If used continually, it can cause weakness in the core muscles. 
L114	Advice	Ice to the lower back (supine)	Lying on your back, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas under your lower back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
L115	Advice	Heat to the lower back (supine)	Lying on your back, place a heat pack or hot water bottle under your lower back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
L116	Advice	Ice to the lower back (prone)	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your lower back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
L117	Advice	Heat to the lower back (prone)	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your lower back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
L118	Advice	Ice to the SIJ (prone)	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your upper buttock. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
L119	Advice	Heat to the SIJ (prone)	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your upper buttock. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
			
Thoracic Spine			
T001	Flexion	Slump sitting	Sit down, bend your chin down towards your chest, and slump forwards by rounding your back. This exercise is used to stretch the spinal joints. 
T002	Flexion	Over flexion spine	Lie flat on your back, and bend your knees towards your chest. Straighten your legs, and lift your lower back off the floor into a fully bent position. Keep your neck and head flat on the floor during this exercise. 
T003	Extension, posture all	Extension prone	Lie face down, with your hands placed on the back of your head. Slowly extend your upper back. This exercise provides a good stretch to the back, and is especially useful for those with poor posture or rounded shoulders. 
T004	Extension, lumbar extension	Hip extension knees bent	Lie on your front, and bend both knees to 90 degrees. Extend your hips as if you were pushing the soles of your feet towards the ceiling. 
T005	Extension, posture all	Sitting extension	Support your neck by placing your hands interlocked behind your neck, and slowly bend backwards. 
T006	Extension, Swiss ball all, posture all	Sitting extension SB	Sitting upright on a Swiss ball all, support your neck by placing your hands interlocked behind your neck, and slowly bend backwards. 
T007	Extension, posture all	Towel extension vertical	Roll up a hand-towel, and place it under your spine and lie flat on your back with your knees bent. This exercise can help improve mobility to the spine and improve posture. 
T008	Extension, posture all	Towel extension horizontal	Roll up a hand-towel, and place it under your spine and lie flat on your back with your knees bent. You can place the rolled up towel anywhere along the upper back, but one of the best places is right underneath the shoulder blades. This exercise can help improve mobility to the spine and improve posture. 
T009	Extension, posture all	Foam roller extension vertical	Place a foam roller under your spine and lie flat on your back with your knees bent. To make the exercise harder, you can drop your neck to the floor, or straighten the legs. This exercise can help improve mobility to the spine and improve posture. 
T010	Extension, posture all	Foam roller extension horizontal	Place a foam roller under your spine and lie flat on your back with your knees bent. You can place the rolled up towel anywhere along the upper back, but one of the best places is right underneath the shoulder blades. Slowly roll your spine over the foam roller, and you will feel it pushing up into your back. This exercise can help improve mobility to the spine and improve posture. 
T011	Side flexion	Side flexion	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart, and you hands resting on your hips. Bend your spine to one side, and repeat to the opposite side. This will help stretch your spine. 
T012	Side flexion	Dow rod side flexion standing	Stand with good posture, and place a dowel rod, golf club or broom over your head, with it resting comfortably on your shoulders, and hold onto the rod with both hands. Bend your spine to the left, keeping hold of the bar. Keep your hips still and repeat to the opposite side. This exercise will stretch your spine. 
T013	Side flexion	Dow rod side flexion sitting	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. Place a dowel rod, golf club or broom over your head, with it resting comfortably on your shoulders, and hold onto the rod with both hands. Bend your spine to one side, keeping hold of the dowel rod. Keep your hips still and repeat to the opposite side. This exercise will help stretch your spine. 
T014	Side flexion, Swiss ball all	Dow rod side flexion SB	Sit upright on a Swiss ball all, with your feet flat on the floor. Place a dowel rod, golf club or broom over your head, with it resting comfortably on your shoulders, and hold onto the rod with both hands. Bend your spine to one side, keeping hold of the dowel rod. Keep your hips still and repeat to the opposite side. This exercise will help stretch your spine. 
T015	Side flexion, extension	Sitting extension with side flexion	Support your neck by placing your hands interlocked behind your neck, and slowly bend backwards and to the side. Repeat to each side. This exercise will help mobility in the spinal joints. 
T016	Side flexion, Swiss ball all, lumbar side flexion	SB side flexion	Sitting on a ball with your hands interlocked behind your neck, or across your shoulders, and slowly bend to the side. Repeat to each side. This exercise will help stretch your spine. 
T017	Rotation, lumbar rotation	Sitting rotation	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. Cross your arms over your shoulders. Twist to one side keeping your hips still. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T018	Rotation, lumbar rotation	Sitting rotation 2	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. Interlock your hands behind your neck, and twist to one side keeping your hips still. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T019	Rotation, lumbar rotation	Golf club rotation	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. Place a golf club or broom over your head, with it resting comfortably on your shoulders, hold onto the bar with both hands. Twist to one side as far as you can go. Keep your hips still and your spine upright. Repeat on the other side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine, and especially useful as a warm-up prior to rotational sports such as golf. 
T020	Rotation, Swiss ball all, lumbar rotation	Sitting rotation SB	Sit upright on a Swiss ball all, with your feet flat on the floor. Cross your arms over your shoulders. Twist to one side keeping your hips still. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T021	Rotation, Swiss ball all, lumbar rotation	Sitting rotation SB	Sit upright on a Swiss ball all, with your feet flat on the floor. Interlock your hands behind your neck, and twist to one side keeping your hips still. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T022	Rotation, Swiss ball all, lumbar rotation	Golf club rotation SB	Sit upright on a Swiss ball all, with your feet flat on the floor. Place a golf club or broom over your head, with it resting comfortably on your shoulders, hold onto the bar with both hands. Twist to one side as far as you can go. Keep your hips still and your spine upright. Repeat on the other side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine, and especially useful as a warm-up prior to rotational sports such as golf. 
T023	Rotation	Standing rotation	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Cross your arms over your shoulders. Twist your spine to one side as far as comfortable. Keep your spine upright. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T024	Rotation, lumbar rotation	Standing rotation hips locked	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart and your feet turned inwards. Cross your arms over your shoulders. Twist your spine to one side as far as comfortable. Keep your spine upright. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine. 
T025	Rotation	Standing golf rotation	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Place a golf club, broom or dowel rod behind your back. Twist your spine to one side as far as comfortable. Keep your spine upright. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine, and especially useful as a warm-up prior to rotational sports such as golf. 
T026	Rotation, lumbar rotation	Standing golf rotation hips locked	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart, and your feet turned inwards. Place a golf club, broom or dowel rod behind your back. Twist your spine to one side as far as comfortable. Keep your spine upright. Repeat to the opposite side. This exercise is a mobility exercise for the spine, and especially useful as a warm-up prior to rotational sports such as golf. 
T027	Rotation, Side flexion, flexion, extension	Fig of Eight articulation	Place your hands behind your neck, and bring your elbows together. Now draw a figure of eight with your elbows (which will also move your back). This excellent mobility exercise will improve the mobility in your spine, act as a useful warm up before sport, and get you more flexible. Do not be alarmed if you hear a few pops and clicks coming from the spine. 
T028	Rotation, Side flexion, flexion, extension, Swiss ball all	Fig of Eight articulation SB	Place your hands behind your neck, and bring your elbows together. Now draw a figure of eight with your elbows (which will also move your back). This excellent mobility exercise will improve the mobility in your spine, act as a useful warm up before sport, and get you more flexible. Do not be alarmed if you hear a few pops and clicks coming from the spine. 
T029	Advice	Ice (sitting)	Sitting on a chair, place an ice pack or packet of frozen peas over your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The ice helps reduce inflammation and pain. 
T030	Advice	Heat (sitting)	Sitting on a chair, place a heat pack, wheat bag or hot water bottle over your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain. 
T031	Advice	Ice (supine)	Lying on your back, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas under your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
T032	Advice	Heat (supine)	Lying on your back, place a heat pack or hot water bottle under your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
T033	Advice	Ice (prone)	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
T034	Advice	Heat (prone)	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your upper or mid-back. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
			
Knee			
K001	Flexion	Knee flexion supine	Slide your heel towards your bottom. Go as far as feels comfortable, and then return to the start position (with the leg straight). This is a good way to improve mobility to a stiff knee joint. 
K002	Flexion	Knee flexion prone	Lie face down, and bend your knee bringing your heel towards your bottom. You will feel a gentle stretch into the front of the thigh. Make sure you bend the leg slowly and in a controlled way, trying not to judder or cog-wheel the foot to ensure good quality movement of the hamstring. Return to the start position slowly and using the same level of control. 
K003	Flexion	Knee flexion prone	Lie face down, and bend your knee bringing your heel towards your bottom. Use your other leg to help you bend the knee further, especially useful if you cannot reach your leg with your hand, or your leg is too weak to move on its own. You will feel a gentle stretch into the front of the thigh. 
K004	Flexion	Knee flexion supine overpressure	Bend your knee towards your chest, and pull the heel towards your bottom to apply overpressure. You will feel a stretch in the front of your thigh. 
K005	Flexion	Quad stretch 1	Lie face down, and bend your knee bringing your heel towards your bottom. Use your hand or a towel to create overpressure. You will feel a stretch into the front of your thigh.
K006	Flexion	Quad stretch 2	Pull your foot towards your bottom. If you are unsteady on your feet, make sure you hold on to something sturdy next to you like a wall or a table. You will feel a stretch into the front of your thigh.
K007	Flexion	Quad stretch 3	In a kneeling position, pull one foot towards your bottom which will be the leg that is being stretched. You will feel a stretch into the front of your thigh.
K008	Flexion	Quad stretch 4 single leg	Sit down on one heel (your other leg should be straight in front of you), and then relax your body backwards, creating a stretch to the front of your thigh. 
K009	Flexion	Quad stretch 4 double leg	Sit down on your heels, and then relax the body backwards. At the same time, just slightly lift your pelvis to create a stretch to the front of your thighs. 
K010	Flexion	Quad stretch 5 double leg	Sit down on your heels, place your arms across your chest, contract your abdominal muscles, and lean your body backwards. This will create a gentle stretch to the front of your thighs. 
K011	Flexion	Quad stretch 6 double leg	Lie face down, and bend your knees bringing your heels towards your bottom. Use your hands or a towel to create overpressure. You will feel a stretch into the front of your thighs.
K012	Flexion	Quad stretch assisted	Lie face down, and have a friend gently bend your knee. Provide feedback as to how far they can bend your knee. You should feel a stretch to the front of your thigh. Always keep the stretch comfortable and within your limits. 
K013	Flexion, hip extension	Quad stretch side-lying	Lie on your side, and pull your heel towards your bottom to feel a stretch in the front of your thigh. You may want to hold on to your knee of your bottom leg to give you extra support (especially useful if you are prone to back pain). 
K014	Flexion	Knee swing high chair	Sit on a high chair or table (slightly on the edge) and let your leg dangle. Bend your knee as far as feels comfortable, then relax. Keep the movement controlled, not too fast. This exercise is especially useful for increasing mobility to a stiff knee. 
K015	Flexion, exercise band all	Hamstring curl with band	Tie a band around your ankle, and attach the other end to a fixed object (e.g. under a weight, or around the leg of a table). Bend the knee creating a resistance in the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the hamstring muscle group (located at the back of the thigh). 
K016	Flexion	Knee flexion passive	Sit down on the floor, and place a towel around your foot. Gently pull the towel to bend the knee. Try to keep the knee relaxed at all times. Straighten your knee to return to the start position. This is a good exercise to improve mobility in a stiff knee joint. 
K017	Flexion, foam roller all, Swiss ball all	Knee flexion with ball/foam roller	Sit on a chair or Swiss ball all, and place the sole of the foot on a medicine ball or foam roller. Roll the ball/roller in front of you and back again. If you don't have a foam roller or medicine ball, you can use a drink's can, another tube like object, a football or other small ball. 
K018	Flexion, balance all, co-ordination all, cardio all	Marching	March on the spot. Make sure to lift your opposite arm when lifting your knee up. Try to stay in exactly the same spot throughout your march. This exercise is good for endurance, as well as balance and co-ordination. 
K019	Flexion, cardio all	Jogging with high knees	Jog on the spot, or moving forwards, and lift the knees as high as feels comfortable. This exercise is good for endurance. 
K020	Flexion, cardio all	Alternate heel kicks	Standing, kick the heel towards the bottom of one leg and then go back to your start position, and then repeat with the other leg. Heel kicks are useful for warming up the hamstring muscle group (located at the back of the thigh). 
K021	Flexion	Heel kicks prone	Lying face down, kick the heel towards the bottom. Slowly return to the start position. Heel kicks are useful for warming up the hamstring muscle group (located at the back of the thigh). 
K022	Flexion, exercise band all	Sitting knee flex with band	Sit on the side of a chair, and attach a band around your ankle and anchor the opposite end in front of you. Bend your knee and feel the resistance against the band, and the hamstring muscle at the back of your thigh working. 
K023	Flexion, hip extension	Raging bulls	Slide your heel backwards along the ground, creating a gentle pressure, and forcing the hamstring muscles (at the back of the thigh) to work against resistance. 
K024	Flexion, hip flexion	1/4 squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, and bend your knees to the 1/4 squat position.
K025	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	1/4 squat single leg	Stand on one leg, and bend your knee to the 1/4 squat position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K026	Flexion, hip flexion, Swiss ball all	1/4 squat SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot (0.5m) from the wall. Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width. Bend your knees to the 1/4 squat position.
K027	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, Swiss ball all	1/4 squat single leg SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot from the wall. Lift one leg off the floor. Bend your knee to the 1/4 squat position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of the knee cap in line with the middle toes of the foot. Do not let the knee drift off to one side. 
K028	Flexion, hip flexion	1/4 wall squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knees to the 1/4 squat position. Hold this position. 
K029	Flexion, hip flexion	1/4 wall squat single leg	Stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knee to the 1/4 squat position. Hold this position. 
K030	Flexion, hip flexion	1/2 squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, and bend your knees to the 1/2 squat position.
K031	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	1/2 squat single leg	Stand on one leg, and bend your knee to the 1/2 squat position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K032	Flexion, hip flexion, Swiss ball all	1/2 squat SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot (0.5m) from the wall. Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width. Bend your knees to the 1/2 squat position.
K033	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, Swiss ball all	1/2 squat single leg SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot (0.5m) from the wall. Lift one leg off the floor. Bend your knee to the 1/2 squat position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K034	Flexion, hip flexion	1/2 squat ball squeeze	Open your legs but hold a ball between your knees/thighs, and bend your knees to the 1/2 squat position.
K035	Flexion, hip flexion	1/2 wall squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knees to the 1/2 squat position. Hold this position. 
K036	Flexion, hip flexion	1/2 wall squat single leg	Stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knee to the 1/2 squat position. Hold this position. 
K037	Flexion, hip flexion	Full squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, and bend your knees to the full squat (90 degrees) position.
K038	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	Full squat single leg	Stand on one leg, and bend your knee to the full squat (90 degrees) position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K039	Flexion, hip flexion, Swiss ball all, proprioception	Full squat SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot (0.5m) from the wall. Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width. Bend your knees to the full squat (90 degrees) position.
K040	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, Swiss ball all	Full squat single leg SB	Place a Swiss ball all behind your lower back, and place your feet two foot (0.5m) from the wall. Lift one leg off the floor. Bend your knee to the full squat (90 degrees) position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K041	Flexion, hip flexion	Full wall squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knees to the full squat position (90 degrees). Hold this position. 
K042	Flexion, hip flexion	Full wall squat single leg	Stand with your back resting against a wall, and bend your knee to the full squat position (90 degrees). Hold this position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K043	Flexion, hip flexion	Full squat with overhead press	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, and bend your knees to the full squat (90 degrees) position as you lift a medicine ball above your head. 
K044	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	Full squat single leg cup reach	Place 5 cups in front of you, and stand in the middle of them. Squat down (on one leg), and reach for one cup then come up, then repeat with the second cup, etc. Be careful to maintain control to the leg, and do not perform the exercise too quickly. 
K045	Flexion, hip flexion, exercise band all	Lateral walk with exercise band	Place an exercise band around your knees, and go into a squat position (as far down as feels comfortable). Walk one leg to the side, and then follow with the other leg. Repeat to one side for five steps, then return to the start position. 
K046	Flexion, hip flexion	Monkey squat	Open your legs slightly wider than shoulder width, and bend your knees as far as possible while keeping your feet flat on the ground. Your therapist might ask you to hold this position for an extended period of time, or to return to the start position and do repetitions.  
K047	Flexion, hip flexion	Sumo 1/2 squat	Turn your feet outwards, and widen your legs to double the width of your shoulders. Squat down into a 1/2 squat position. 
K048	Flexion, hip flexion	Sumo full squat	Turn your feet outwards, and widen your legs to double the width of your shoulders. Squat down into a full squat position. 
K049	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	Single leg squat on box	Stand on a high box or step, and squat down so your dangling foot is just off the floor. Control your leg into the squat, and then straighten your leg and return to the start position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. 
K050	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception	Single leg pistol squat	Position one leg out straight in front of you, then perform a full squat as low down as you can go comfortably. Caution: this exercise is for those with healthy knees, and you should be well conditioned before attempting this. 
K051	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, balance all, co-ordination all	BOSU squat	Stand on a BOSU, and go into a squat position. Try to maintain good form/technique. Return to the start position. Using a BOSU helps improve your balance and strengthens the smaller muscles of the leg. 
K052	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, balance all, co-ordination all	BOSU squat single leg	Stand on a BOSU, and go into a squat position while standing on one leg. Try to maintain good form/technique. Return to the start position. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. Using a BOSU helps improve your balance and strengthens the smaller muscles of the leg.
K053	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, balance all, co-ordination all	Reverse BOSU squat	Stand on an upside-down BOSU, and go into a squat position. Try to maintain good form/technique. Return to the start position. Using a BOSU helps improve your balance and strengthens the smaller muscles of the leg.
K054	Flexion, hip flexion, proprioception, balance all, co-ordination all	Reverse BOSU squat single leg	Stand on an upside-down BOSU, and go into a squat position on one leg. Try to maintain good form/technique. Return to the start position. Note: this exercise is hard, so only do this if you have strong legs. Make sure when you squat you keep the middle of your knee cap in line with the middle toes of your foot. Do not let your knee drift off to one side. Using a BOSU helps improve your balance and strengthens the smaller muscles of the leg.
K055	Flexion, hip flexion	Split squat	Take a step forwards (as if you were going into a lunge), and drop the back knee towards the ground. The front knee stays at 90 degrees, but does not go forwards of that point. 
K056	Flexion, hip flexion	Lunge	Take a step forwards, and bend the front knee past the vertical. The back knee drops towards the floor. 
K057	Flexion, hip flexion	Walking lunge	Take a step forwards, and bend the front knee past the vertical. The back knee drops towards the floor. Now follow this into another lunge position using the other leg. 
K058	Flexion, hip flexion	Backward lunge	Take a step backwards, and drop your knee towards the floor. 
K059	Flexion, hip flexion, hip abduction	Side lunge	Standing with your feet together, step to your side twice shoulder width and bend your knee. Your leg that stayed behind should straighten. Return to the start position. 
K060	Flexion, hip flexion, hip abduction	Deep side lunge adductor stretch	A deep side-lunge adductor stretch can be achieved by keeping one leg straight, while fully bending the other knee, and squatting down. You may find it easier to rest your hands on the floor to support yourself. Feel the stretch on the inside of your straight leg. 
K061	Flexion, hip flexion	Box Step front	Step onto a box or step, placing both feet on the step, and then step down using the same leg that you lead with. 
K062	Flexion, hip flexion	Box step front single leg	Step onto a box or step, placing one foot on the step, but before you place the other foot down, return to the start position. Repeat on the same leg the specified number of repetitions before moving onto the other leg. 
K063	Flexion, hip flexion	Box step side	Step onto a box or step to your side, placing both feet on the step, and then step down. 
K064	Flexion, hip flexion	Box jump	With both legs, jump onto a box. Use a little bit of knee bend when you jump, and keep both feet facing forwards. Try to keep good posture by keeping your head up. 
K065	Flexion, hip flexion	Box jump lateral	Stand to the side of a box, and jump on to it. Use a little bit of knee bend when you jump, and keep both feet facing forwards. Try to keep good posture by keeping your head up. 
K066	Flexion, extension, hip flexion 	Leg press double leg	Sit on a leg press machine, with your feet facing upwards (your therapist might ask you to turn your feet either facing outwards or inwards depending on a particular muscle group to be worked), and slowly straighten your legs. When your legs are fully straight, return to the start position. This exercise predominantly strengthens the quadricep muscle group (at the front of your thigh). 
K067	Flexion, extension, hip flexion	Leg press single leg	Sit on a leg press machine, with your foot facing upwards (your therapist might ask you to turn your foot either facing outwards or inwards depending on a particular muscle group to be worked), and slowly straighten your leg. When your leg is fully straight, return to the start position. This exercise predominantly strengthens the quadricep muscle group (at the front of your thigh). 
K068	Flexion, hip flexion, co-ordination all	Double leg hop (lateral)	Bend your knees, and keep your feet shoulder width apart. Jump to one side, and then the other side, then repeat. 
K069	Flexion, hip flexion, co-ordination all	Double leg hop (front)	Bend your knees, and keep your feet shoulder width apart. Jump in front of you, and then behind you, and repeat. 
K070	Flexion, hip flexion, balance all, co-ordination all	Single leg hop (lateral)	Standing on one leg, bend your knee to prepare yourself to jump. Keep your knee in good alignment (facing forwards in a straight line). Jump to one side, and then the other side, then repeat. 
K071	Flexion, hip flexion, balance all, co-ordination all	Single leg hop (front)	Standing on one leg, bend your knee to prepare yourself to jump. Keep your knee in good alignment (facing forwards in a straight line). Jump in front of you. Your therapist may also ask you to jump behind you but be careful as its possible to lose balance.  
K072	Flexion, hip flexion, co-ordination all	Double leg multiple hop (lateral)	Bend your knees, and keep your feet shoulder width apart. Jump to one side, and repeat over some equally spaced obstacles.
K073	Flexion, hip flexion, co-ordination all	Double leg multiple hop (front)	Bend your knees, and keep your feet shoulder width apart. Jump in front of you, and repeat over some equally spaced obstacles. 
K074	Flexion, extension, hip flexion, hip extension, core all	Mountain climber	Start in a press-up position, and bring one leg in so your left knee is close to your left hand. Straight away, take it back out and then bring your right knee in towards your right hand, and repeat. This exercise is great for strength-endurance and works the whole body.   
K075	Flexion, extension, hip flexion, hip extension, core all	Mountain jumper	Start in a press-up position, and jump both legs in towards your chest, and then jump both legs out so they are straight. This exercise is great for strength-endurance and works the whole body.   
K076	Extension, flexion, hip flexion	Knee extension supine	Slide your heel away from your bottom to straighten your leg. Go as far as feels comfortable, and then return to the start position. This exercise strengthens the hip flexor and quadricep muscle group.   
K077	Extension, flexion, hip flexion, core all	Knee extension supine 2	Lie flat on your back and bend your knees towards your chest, then slowly straighten your legs and lower them to the start position. This exercise strengthens the hip flexor, core and quadricep muscle group. 
K078	Extension, flexion	Knee extension prone	Lying face down, with your knee flexed, straighten your leg slowly and in a controlled manner. Return to the start position. Try not to let your leg jerk, but keep the movement as smooth as possible. This exercise is a useful hamstring rehabilitation exercise. 
K079	Extension, flexion	Knee extension passive	Sit down with your heel resting on a chair opposite you. Gently use your hand to push your knee downwards, to make your leg straight. This exercise is especially useful for stiff knees, or when you have difficulty straightening your leg. 
K080	Extension, hip flexion, Swiss ball all	Hamstring stretch 1	Standing up, place your foot on a chair or Swiss ball all. Keep the leg straight. You should feel a stretch behind the knee and into the back of the thigh. To make the stretch stronger, push your leg downwards into the ball/chair, or rest the foot on something higher. 
K081	Extension, hip flexion, Swiss ball all, ankle dorsiflexion	Hamstring and calf stretch 2	Standing up, place your foot on a chair or Swiss ball all. Keep the leg straight. Pull your toes and ankle towards you. You should feel a stretch behind the knee and the calf muscle and into the back of the thigh. To make the stretch stronger, push your leg downwards into the ball/chair, or rest the foot on something higher. 
K082	Extension, hip flexion, Swiss ball all	Hamstring stretch 3	Standing up, place your foot on a chair or Swiss ball all. Keep your leg straight. You should feel a stretch behind the knee and into the back of the thigh. Now lean forwards and try to touch your toes. 
K083	Extension, hip flexion	Hamstring stretch 4	Lying down on your back, flex your hip until you can feel a stretch behind your thigh (in the hamstring muscles). You may not be able to get to 90 degrees, but go as far as you feel the stretch. 
K084	Extension, hip flexion	Hamstring stretch 4 with partner	Lying down on your back, ask your partner to flex your hip until you can feel a stretch behind your thigh (in the hamstring muscles). 
K085	Extension, hip flexion	Hamstring stretch 5	Lying down on your back, flex your hip until you can feel a stretch behind your thigh (in the hamstring muscles). Use a towel to apply some overpressure and create a stronger stretch. 
K086	Extension, hip flexion	Hamstring stretch 6	Keeping your legs straight, touch your toes (or go down as far as feels comfortable). You will feel a stretch in the hamstrings (at the back of your thigh) and maybe the lower back as well. 
K087	Extension, hip flexion	Hamstring stretch 7	Sitting down, keep your legs straight in front of you, and reach forwards to touch your toes. Go as far as feels comfortable. You will feel a stretch in the hamstrings (at the back of your thigh) and maybe the lower back as well. 
K088	Extension, ankle dorsiflexion	Hamstring stretch 8	Sit down on the floor, and place a towel or band around the sole of your foot. Pull the toes towards you while straightening the leg. You will feel a stretch in the calves and hamstrings (at the back of your legs). 
K089	Extension, hip flexion, ankle dorsiflexion	Sitting leg straightener	Sit down on a chair, and place a towel under your thigh. Pull your toes up, tighten the muscles in the front of your thigh (quadriceps muscles), and slowly pull your leg to a straight position. 
K090	Extension, exercise band all	Knee extension with band	Stand up, and position the exercise band around your ankle. Keep the knee in a flexed position, and then straighten your leg against resistance from the band. This exercise will strengthen the quadricep muscle group (at the front of the thigh), but also improve balance and stability on your opposite leg. 
K091	Extension, exercise band all	Knee extension with band sitting	Sit down, bend your knee and put an exercise band around the sole of your foot. Straighten the leg against resistance. You will feel the front thigh (quadriceps) muscles working. 
K092	Extension, hip flexion	Football kicks	Bend your knee and kick your leg directly in front of you. 
K093	Extension, hip flexion, exercise band all	Football kicks with band	Attach a band around your ankle and anchor the opposite end. Bend your knee and kick your leg directly in front of you as if you were kicking a ball. As you kick, you should feel some resistance in the band. This may throw you off balance, and you may need to hold on. The leg not doing the kicking also gets a work out acting as a stabiliser. 
K094	Extension, proprioception, co-ordination all, ankle balance/proprioception	Knee extension proprioception	Lying on your back, next to a wall. Push your foot into a gym ball, goof ball or football, with the ball up against the wall. Use increasing amounts of pressure towards the wall to make the exercise more challenging. You will feel your leg working to stabilise the ball. 
K095	Extension	Active extension on towel	Lie on your back or sit on the floor, and place a rolled up towel under your knee. Straighten your leg against the towel. This exercise helps to straighten your leg if your knee is stiff, and also strengthens the quadricep muscle group (at the front of your thigh). 
K096	Proprioception, ankle balance/proprioception, Swiss ball all, co-ordination all	Ball control	Sitting on a chair or Swiss ball all, place the sole of the foot onto a ball. Move the ball around in different directions, out in front of you, round in circles, to the sides. 
K097	Proprioception, hip other	Single-leg stand	Stand on one leg. You can soften the knee slightly if you wish. Be careful not to fall over (stand next to a wall or table if you are unsteady on your leg). Hold this position. You will feel the leg working, and will likely get some muscle aching all over the leg and buttock. 
K098	Proprioception, hip other	Single-leg stand (eyes shut)	Stand on one leg with your eyes shut. You can soften the knee slightly if you wish. Be careful not to fall over (stand next to a wall or table if you are unsteady on your leg). Hold this position. You will feel the leg working, and will likely get some muscle aching all over the leg and buttock. 
K099	Proprioception, hip other	Leg stand on tip-toes	Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Raise up and stand on your tip-toes/forefoot. You may be a little unbalanced, so make sure you hold on to a table if you need to. You will feel the leg working, especially in the calf muscles, and will likely get some muscle aching all over the leg and buttock if you hold it for an extended period of time. 
K100	Proprioception, hip other	Single leg stand on tip-toes	Stand on one leg. When you feel completely balanced, raise up and stand on your tip-toes/forefoot. This is a difficult exercise, so make sure you hold on to a table if you are unbalanced or do not have the adequate strength/balance. You will feel the leg working, especially in the calf muscle, and will likely get some muscle aching all over the leg and buttock if you hold it for an extended period of time. 
K101	Other	Patella mobilisation	Sit with your knee straight, and your leg relaxed. Grasp your knee cap (patella) with your fingers and thumb, and wiggle the knee cap from side to side and up and down. It may be stiff to start it, but once mobile the patella should move freely. This is a great exercise for anyone with a stiff patella. 
K102	Advice	Ice to the knee (sitting)	Apply an ice pack or frozen peas to your knee. Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
K103	Advice	Heat to the knee (sitting)	Apply a heat pack or hot water bottle to your knee. Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
K104	Advice	Ice to the knee (supine)	Apply an ice pack or frozen peas to your knee. Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
K105	Advice	Heat to the knee (supine) 	Apply a heat pack or hot water bottle to your knee. Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
K106	Advice	Ice to the quadriceps (sitting)	Apply an ice pack or frozen peas to your thigh muscle (quadriceps). Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. 
K107	Advice	Heat to the quadriceps (sitting)	Apply a heat pack or hot water bottle to your thigh muscle (quadriceps). Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. 
K108	Advice	Ice to the quadriceps (supine)	Apply an ice pack or frozen peas to your thigh muscle (quadriceps). Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too cold. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. 
K109	Advice	Heat to the quadriceps (supine)	Apply a heat pack or hot water bottle to your thigh muscle (quadriceps). Make sure you wrap it in a thin towel so its not too hot. Use this to reduce pain and inflammation. 
			
Hip			
H001	Flexion	Leg lift	Lift your leg off the floor/bed. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint and strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H002	Flexion	Hip flexion lying	Bend your knee towards your chest. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint and strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H003	Flexion	Hip flexion sitting	Bend your knee towards your chest. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint and strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H004	Flexion, external rotation	Hip flexion with external rotation	Turn your leg outwards, and then lift it off the floor/bed. You will feel a pull on the inside of your leg. 
H005	Flexion, internal rotation 	Hip flexion with internal rotation	Turn your leg inwards, and then lift it off the floor/bed. You will feel a pull on the inside of your leg. 
H006	Flexion	Hip flexion standing	Stand up against a wall, and move your leg in front of you at approximately a 30 degree angle. You will most likely feel a stretch behind the back of the thigh (hamstring). 
H007	Flexion	Hip flexion standing 2	Stand up against a wall, and bend your knee towards your chest. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint and strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H008	Flexion	Hip flexion standing overpressure	Stand up against a wall, and bend your knee towards your chest. Use your hand to pull the knee upwards. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint. 
H009	Flexion	Hip flexion side-lying	Lie on your side, and bend your hip as close to your chest as feels comfortable. Use your hand to help you. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint. 
H010	Flexion	Hip flexion assisted	Grasp the back of your thigh (hamstring) and pull your knee towards your chest. Using your hands, straighten your leg to return to the start position. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint. 
H011	Flexion	Hip flexion sitting overpressure	Bend the knee towards your chest. You can use your hands to assist you if required. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint. 
H012	Flexion	Hip flexion lying resisted	Bend your knee towards your chest to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up), but resist against the movement (using your hand to push against the leg) so  your knee does not actually move beyond 90 degrees. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H013	Flexion	Hip flexion sitting resisted	Place your hand on the top of your knee, and resist the movement of your knee towards your chest. The leg/knee should not move. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H014	Flexion, exercise band all	Hip flexion with band	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object behind you, move the leg forwards to create resistance in the band. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles, but also improve the balance and stability of your other leg. 
H015	Flexion, exercise band all	Hip flexion with band kick	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object behind you, move the flexed leg forwards and then kick (straighten the leg) to create resistance in the band. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles, but also improve the balance and stability of your other leg.
H016	Flexion, exercise band all, abduction, adduction	Knee kick multi-directional with band	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object behind you, move the leg forwards and then kick (straighten the leg) to create resistance in the band. Start in front of you, then at a 45 degree angle to each side. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles, but also improve the balance and stability of your other leg.
H017	Flexion, adduction	Glute stretch supine 1	Lie on your back, and bring your knee towards your opposite shoulder to feel a stretch in your bottom. Tip: changing the angle you take the leg will change the position of the stretch and you can play around with the position to find the stretch that feels most effective for you. 
H018	Flexion, external rotation	Glute stretch supine 2	Lie on your back, and bend your knee to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up). Place your ankle across your knee. To make the stretch stronger, pull your ankle towards you, while pushing away with the opposite knee (the side getting stretched). You should feel a stretch in your bottom. 
H019	Flexion, external rotation	Glute stretch supine 3   	Lie on your back, and bend your knee to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up). Place your ankle across your opposite knee and pull the knee towards your chest to feel a stretch in your bottom. You can also use a towel to assist you. 
H020	Flexion, adduction	Glute stretch supine 3 assisted	Lie on your back, and ask a partner to carefully bend your knee towards your opposite shoulder. Give feedback to your partner when you feel the stretch in your bottom, and proceed carefully. 
H021	Flexion, adduction, external rotation	Glute stretch sitting	Place your ankle across your opposite knee, and pull your ankle upwards while pushing downwards on your knee (of the side being stretched). You will feel a stretch in your bottom. 
H022	Flexion, adduction	Glute stretch sitting 2	Pull you knee towards your opposite shoulder. You should feel a stretch in your bottom. 
H023	Flexion	Air cycling	Lie flat on your back, bend the hips and perform a cycling action with the legs. Its great for endurance, and also mobilises your hip joints. 
H024	Flexion, core all	Leg Lift bilateral 	Lift both legs off the floor. Its a great exercise for the lower abdominal muscles, and you will also feel the hip flexor muscles working too. 
H025	Flexion, external rotation, core all	Hip flexion with external rotation bilateral	Turn your legs outwards, and then lift them off the floor/bed. Its a great exercise for the lower abdominal muscles, and you will also feel the muscles on the front and inside of your thighs working too. 
H026	Flexion, internal rotation, core all	Hip flexion with internal rotation bilateral 	Turn your legs inwards, and then lift them off the floor/bed. Its a great exercise for the lower abdominal muscles, and you will also feel the muscles on the front and inside of your thighs working too. 
H027	Flexion, extension	Leg swing front	Hold on to a chair, and swing your leg in front of you and then behind you in a controlled way. Its a great way to dynamically warm up the leg and hip, but also used to gain more mobility to the hip joint. 
H028	Flexion	Hanging leg raise	Grasp an overhead bar, or use parallel bars, and support your back against it. Lift your knees upwards to a 90 degree angle and hold. This exercise will strengthen the abdominal muscles and the hip flexor muscles. 
H029	Flexion	Hanging leg raise straight leg	Grasp an overhead bar, or use parallel bars, and support your back against it. Keeping your legs straight, lift your legs upwards to a 90 degree angle and hold. This exercise will strengthen the abdominal muscles and the hip flexor muscles. 
H030	Flexion	Scissor kick	Lie flat on your back, and lift your straight legs up and down (without resting at the floor) in an opposite motion to each other. This exercise will strengthen the lower abdominal muscles and the hip flexor muscles. 
H031	Flexion	Standing leg raise cable	Stand up, with good posture, and attach a cable cuff to your ankle (if you do not have a cuff, use a towel to tie to the handle of a cable machine). With a straight leg, move it in front of your body. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H032	Flexion	Standing leg raise cable 2	Stand up, with good posture, and attach a cable cuff to your ankle (if you do not have a cuff, use a towel to tie to the handle of a cable machine). Lift your knee up towards your chest to a 90 degree angle. This exercise will strengthen the hip flexor muscles. 
H033	Extension	Leg lift prone	Lift your leg behind you. This exercise predominantly strengthens the gluteal (buttock) muscles. 
H034	Extension	Leg lift knee flexed prone	Lift your leg behind you, making sure you keep your knee bent. This exercise predominantly strengthens the gluteal (buttock) muscles. 
H035	Extension	Leg lift prone bilateral	Lift your legs behind you. This exercise predominantly strengthens the gluteal (buttock) and lumbar muscles. 
H036	Extension	Hip extension side-lying	Lie on your side, and move your hip behind you. If its more comfortable, you can hold your bottom knee to provide added support. This exercise predominantly strengthens the gluteal (buttock) muscles. 
H037	Extension, lumbar spine all	Hip flexor stretch	In a kneeling lunge position, move your body forwards to create a stretch to the front of your thigh and groin. If you want to make the stretch stronger, tilt your pelvis backwards as shown in the photo. Use a pillow under your knee if you find you need the padding. 
H038	Extension, lumbar spine all	Hip flexor stretch 2	In a kneeling lunge position, move your body forwards to create a stretch to the front of your thigh and slightly into your groin. Place your foot on a stool to create an extra stretch. Use a pillow under your knee if you find you need the padding. If you need to make the stretch stronger, tilt your pelvis backwards as shown in the photo. 
H039	Extension, lumbar spine all	Hip flexor stretch 3	Perch on a bed, and hold one knee on your chest, while your other leg flops down over the end of the bed. You should feel a stretch into the front of your thigh. 
H040	Extension, exercise band all	Hip extension with band	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object in front of you, move the leg backwards to create resistance in the band. This exercise strengthens the gluteal (buttock) muscles, but also improves stability and balance of the opposite leg. 
H041	Extension	Hip extension resisted	Bend your knee towards your chest to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up), but resist against moving your leg back down, using your hands to hold the back of your thigh (hamstring area) preventing your leg from moving.
H042	Extension	Hip extension standing	Stand with your hand on a wall, table or chair, and extend your leg behind you. You should feel a pull in your buttock (gluteal) muscles. 
H043	Extension	Hip extension with cable	Stand up, with good posture, and attach a cable cuff to your ankle (if you do not have a cuff, use a towel to tie to the handle of a cable machine). Extend your leg behind you. This exercise strengthens your gluteal (buttock) muscles.
H044	Abduction	Hip abduction side-lying	Lie on your side, and lift your leg upwards. This exercise predominantly strengthens your outer hip and gluteal (buttock) muscles, but also mobilises a stiff hip joint. 
H045	Abduction	Hip abduction standing	Stand up next to a table, chair or wall, and take your leg out to the side. This exercise predominantly strengthens your outer hip and gluteal (buttock) muscles, but also mobilises a stiff hip joint. 
H046	Abduction, flexion	Hip flexion abduction standing	Stand up straight with good posture, and bend your hip to 90 degrees. Turn your leg outwards to feel a stretch in your groin and inner thigh. 
H047	Abduction	Adductor stretch lying	Lie on your back, bend your knee, and drop your leg out to the side. You will feel a stretch on the inside of your leg. You can keep the foot flat on the floor, or lift it off the ground. 
H048	Abduction	Adductor stretch lying two legs	Lie on your back, bend your knees, and drop your legs out to the side. You will feel a stretch on the inside of your legs.
H049	Abduction, flexion	Adductor stretch wall	Lie on your back, with your legs resting against a wall, let your legs drop out to the side. You will feel a stretch on the inside of your thighs. 
H050	Abduction	Adductor stretch sitting	Sitting down on a chair or the floor, bend your knee and drop your leg to one side to create a stretch on the inside of your leg.
H051	Abduction	Adductor stretch sitting two legs	Sitting down on a chair or the floor, bend your knees and drop your legs outwards to create a stretch on the inside of your legs.
H052	Abduction	Adductor stretch sitting overpressure	Sitting down on a chair or the floor, bend your knee and drop your leg to one side to create a stretch on the inside of your leg. Use your hand to push the leg downwards creating a stronger stretch. 
H053	Abduction	Adductor stretch sitting two legs overpressure	Sitting down on a chair or the floor, bend your knees and drop your legs outwards to create a stretch on the inside of your legs. Use your hands to push the legs downward creating a stronger stretch. 
H054	Abduction	Adductor stretch standing	Stand with a wide stance, and lean towards one side creating a stretch on the inside of your leg. Be careful not to go too strong, the adductor muscles (on the inside of the thigh) can easily pull if you stretch too hard. 
H055	Abduction, flexion	Adductor stretch table	Place your inner thing and knee on a table to create a stretch to the inside of your leg.
H056	Abduction, adduction	Leg swing side	Swing your leg to one side, and then the other, in a controlled way. This exercise mobilises a stiff hip joint, and is a good dynamic warm up. 
H057	Abduction, exercise band all	Hip abduction with band	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object to your side, move your straight leg (abduct) away from the body to create resistance in the band. This exercise predominantly strengthens your outer hip and gluteal (buttock) muscles, but also improves balance on your opposite leg. 
H058	Abduction, exercise band all	Hip abduction with band supine	Tie an exercise band around your knees, and gently pull your legs open to create tension in the band. This exercise strengthens the outside of your thighs. 
H059	Abduction, exercise band all	Hip abduction with band supine 2	Tie an exercise band around your ankles, and gently pull your legs open to create tension in the band. This exercise strengthens the outside of your thighs.
H060	Abduction	Hip abduction resisted	Lie on your back, and bend your knee towards your chest to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up), but resist against moving your leg outwards, using your hand to hold the outside of your knee. This exercise strengthens the outside of your thigh.
H061	Abduction	Hip abduction with cable	Stand up, with good posture, and attach a cable cuff to your ankle (if you do not have a cuff, use a towel to tie to the handle of a cable machine). With a straight leg, move it away from your body. This exercise strengthens your gluteal (buttock) and outer hip muscles. 
H062	Abduction	Hip abduction weighted side-lying	Lie on your side, with an ankle weight (or small weight plate) attached to your foot. Lift your leg (and hence the weight resting on the leg) upwards as far as feels comfortable. This exercise strengthens your gluteal (buttock) and outer hip muscles.  
H063	Adduction 	Hip adduction standing	Stand up, and move your leg across your body. This exercise is good for mobilising a stiff hip joint. 
H064	Adduction 	Hip adduction with flexion standing	Stand up with good posture, and bend your hip to 90 degrees, and move your leg across your body. This exercise is good for mobilising a stiff hip joint. 
H065	Adduction, abduction 	Walking abduction and adduction 	Walk with good upright posture, and bend your hip to 90 degrees, moving your leg outwards and then back to the midline. This exercise is good for improving flexibility to your hip joints. 
H066	Adduction 	Hip adduction side lying	Lie on your side, and place your top leg and foot flat on the floor in front of you. Lift your bottom leg upwards towards the ceiling to feel a pull on the inside and outside of your thigh.
H067	Adduction 	Hip adduction lying	Lie flat on your back, bend one hip keeping your foot flat on the floor, and bring your knee towards your other leg. This is a good way to mobilise a stiff hip joint. 
H068	Adduction 	Hip adduction resisted	Either lay your foot flat on the floor, or bend your knee towards your chest to 90 degrees (i.e. pointing straight up), but resist against moving your leg inwards, using your hand to push against the inside of your leg. This is a strengthening exercise for the hip adductor muscles (on the inside of your thigh). 
H069	Adduction 	Ball squeeze lying	Lie down, and bend your knees so your feet are flat on the ground. Squeeze a ball between your knees. You will feel the pressure on the insides of your thighs. 
H070	Adduction 	Magic circle squeeze lying	Lie down, and bend your knees so your feet are flat on the ground. Squeeze a magic circle between your thighs. You will feel the pressure on the insides of your thighs.  
H071	Adduction 	Ball squeeze lying 2	Lie down, and place a ball between your feet but resting on the floor. Squeeze the ball with both legs. You will feel the pressure on the insides and outsides of your thighs. 
H072	Adduction 	Ball squeeze sitting	Sitting down, place a ball between your legs, and squeeze. You will feel a muscle contraction along the inside of your legs and into your groin. 
H073	Adduction	Ball squeeze standing	While standing in a squat position, place a ball between your legs, and squeeze. You will feel a muscle contraction along the inside of your legs and into your groin. 
H074	Adduction, exercise band all	Hip adduction with band	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object to your side, move your straight leg (adduct) across your body to create resistance in the band. Use this exercise to strengthen the adductor muscles on the inside of your thigh, but it will also strengthen other muscles in the leg. 
H075	Adduction, exercise band all	Hip adduction with band supine	With an exercise band secured around your ankle, and the other end anchored to a fixed object to your side, move your straight leg (adduct) across your body to create resistance in the band. Use this exercise to strengthen the adductor muscles on the inside of your thigh, but it will also strengthen other muscles in the leg.   
H076	Adduction, exercise band all	Hip adduction with band supine 2	With an exercise band secured around your knee and your foot flat on the floor, and the other end anchored to a fixed object to your side, move your bent leg (adduct) across your body to create resistance in the band. You will feel pressure on the inside of your thigh. 
H077	Adduction	Pretzel lying	Lie on your back, and bring one knee over towards the opposite side. Place the foot of that knee under your bottom leg which should be slightly bent. Lower your knee towards the floor. 
H078	Adduction	Hip adduction with cable	Stand up, with good posture, and attach a cable cuff to your ankle (if you do not have a cuff, use a towel to tie to the handle of a cable machine). With a straight leg, move it across your body. Use this exercise to strengthen the adductor muscles on the inside of your thigh, but it will also strengthen other muscles in the leg. 
H079	Internal rotation	Internal rotation standing	Stand with good upright posture against a wall. Flatten your back against the wall, and rotate your whole leg inwards. This is a mobility exercise for your hip joint. 
H080	Internal rotation	Internal rotation lying	Lie face down, and let your foot drop out to the side. This is a great mobility exercise for your hip joint. 
H081	Internal rotation	Internal rotation lying double leg	Lie face down, and let your feet drop out to the side. This is a great mobility exercise for your hip joints. 
H082	Internal rotation, exercise band all	Internal rotation lying double leg resisted	Lie face down, with a band tied around your ankles, and let your feet drop out to the side. This exercise is used to strengthen the small muscles around your hip joints. 
H083	Internal rotation	Internal rotation lying 2	Lie face up, bend your hip and knee to 90 degrees, and let your foot drop out to the side (keep your knee where it is). This is a mobility exercise for your hip. 
H084	Internal rotation	Internal rotation lying overpressure	Lie on your back, and bend both knees so your feet are flat on the ground. Lift one leg up, so your hip is at 90 degrees, and turn the foot outwards. Rest a hand on your knee to stabilise the leg, and pull the foot outwards with your hand to make the stretch stronger. This is a mobility exercise for your hip. 
H085	Internal rotation	Hanna's side flexion	Lie down on your side with good postural alignment, and flex your hips and knees to 90 degrees. Part a) Rotate your top leg so the foot points up towards the ceiling, creating a side-flexion in your lower back. Once mastered, move on to Part b) supporting your neck, lift your head towards the ceiling to create a side-flexion to your mid-back. Part c) perform both parts a and b together when you feel ready. 
H086	Internal rotation	Internal rotation sitting	Sit with good posture, and move your foot outwards while you keep your knee in the same place. This is a mobility exercise for your hip. 
H087	Internal rotation	Internal rotation sitting double leg	Sit with good posture, and move your feet outwards while you keep your knees in the same place. This is a mobility exercise for your hip joints. 
H088	Internal rotation, external rotation	Hip mobilisation lying	Lie face down, and bend your knees to 90 degrees. Keep your feet together, and drop your feet outwards, and then cross them inwards, as far as feels comfortable. This is a mobility exercise for your hip joints. 
H089	External rotation	External rotation standing	Stand with good upright posture against a wall. Flatten your back against the wall, and rotate your whole leg outwards. This is a mobility exercise for your hip. 
H090	External rotation	External rotation seated	Sit down on the floor or a chair, and move your knee outwards while resting your foot over your other leg. This is a mobility exercise for your hip, and you will feel some pressure/stretch on the outside of your hip joint. 
H091	External rotation	External rotation seated leg under	Sit down on the floor or a chair, and move your knee outwards while resting your foot under your other leg. This is a mobility exercise for your hip. 
H092	External rotation	External rotation seated overpressure	Sit down on the floor or a chair, and move your knee outwards while resting your foot over your other leg. Use your hand to push the knee downwards. This is a flexibility exercise for your hip, and you will feel some pressure/stretch on the outside of your hip joint. 
H093	External rotation	External rotation table glute stretch	Place your foot on a table, with your leg turned inwards. Lean forwards slightly to feel a stretch in your buttock. 
H094	External rotation, abduction	Clam	Lie on your side, with both knees bent. Keeping your feet together, and squeeze your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards. Open your knees, like a clam, hold, and return to the start position. This is a good strengthening exercise for the gluteal (buttock) and outer thigh/hip muscles. 
H095	External rotation, abduction	Clam advanced	Lie on your side, with both knees bent. Squeeze your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards. Keeping your feet together, lift the feet 3-4 inches above the floor. Open your knees, like a clam, hold, and return to the start position. This is a good strengthening exercise for the gluteal (buttock) and outer thigh/hip muscles. It also works the abdominal core muscles. 
H096	External rotation, abduction	Clam with leg shoot	Lie on your side, with both knees bent. Keeping your feet together, and squeeze your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards. Open your knees, like a clam, straighten your leg and extend it behind you, hold, and return to the start position. This is a good strengthening exercise for the gluteal (buttock) and outer thigh/hip muscles. 
H097	External rotation, abduction	Clam advanced with leg shoot	Lie on your side, with both knees bent. Squeeze your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards. Keeping your feet together, lift the feet 3-4 inches above the floor. Open your knees, like a clam, straighten your leg and extend it behind you, hold, and return to the start position. This is a good strengthening exercise for the gluteal (buttock) and outer thigh/hip muscles. 
H098	External rotation	External rotation lying	Lie face down, bend your knee, and let your foot drop inwards. This exercise will mobilise your hip joint. 
H099	External rotation	External rotation lying bilateral	Lie face down, spread your legs and bend your knees, and let your feet drop inwards. This exercise will mobilise your hip joints.
H100	External rotation	External rotation lying bilateral 2	Lie down on your back, bend your knees so your feet are flat on the floor. Drop your knees outwards keeping your feet together. You will feel a stretch on the inside of your thighs, but its also a mobilisation to the hip joints. 
H101	Other	Gluteal contraction isolated	Learn control of your gluteal muscles by contracting them. Try to squeeze your buttock muscle towards the centre of your buttock cheek. The cheek should go firm when contracted. It may require some help from your therapist to show you how to do this. 
H102	Other, hip extension	Gluteal contraction isolated with hip extension	Contract your buttock cheek, then hamstring and then your lower back, and lift your leg behind you. Try to focus on the correct sequencing. 
H103	Advice	Ice for ischial bursitis / upper hamstring	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the top of your thigh. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H104	Advice	Heat for ischial bursitis / upper hamstring	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the top of your thigh. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H105	Advice	Ice for ischial bursitis (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas under the buttock. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H106	Advice	Heat for ischial bursitis (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the top of your thigh. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using heat can help stimulate blood flow and reduce inflammation and pain. 
H107	Advice, knee advice	Ice for hamstring pain (prone)	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your hamstring. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H108	Advice, knee advice	Heat for hamstring pain (prone)	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your hamstring. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H109	Advice, knee advice	Ice for hamstring pain (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas under your hamstring. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H110	Advice, knee advice	Heat for hamstring pain (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle under your hamstring. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H111	Advice, knee advice	Ice for the back of the knee	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the back of your knee. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H112	Advice, knee advice	Heat for the back of the knee	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the back of your knee. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H113	Advice, knee advice	Ice for the back of the knee	Lying on your front, place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the back of your knee. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H114	Advice, knee advice	Heat for the back of the knee	Lying on your front, place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the back of your knee. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H115	Advice	Ice to hip flexor (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the front of your hip. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H116	Advice	Heat to hip flexor (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the front of your hip. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H117	Advice	Ice to hip flexor (supine)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the front of your hip. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H118	Advice	Heat to hip flexor (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the front of your hip. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H119	Advice	Ice to adductor (sitting)	Wrap an ice pack or pack of frozen peas around the inside of your thigh. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H120	Advice	Heat to adductor (sitting)	Wrap a heat pack or hot water bottle around the inside of your thigh. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H121	Advice	Ice to adductor (supine)	Wrap an ice pack or pack of frozen peas around the inside of your thigh. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. 
H122	Advice	Heat to adductor (supine)	Wrap a heat pack or hot water bottle around the inside of your thigh. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain.
H123	Advice	Ice to trochanter (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the side of your hip. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. This exercise is very useful to treat trochanteric bursitis.
H124	Advice	Heat to trochanter (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the side of your hip. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain. This exercise is very useful to treat trochanteric bursitis.
H125	Advice	Ice to trochanter (supine)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over the side of your hip. Be careful that its not too cold, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. Using ice can help reduce inflammation and pain. This exercise is very useful to treat trochanteric bursitis.
H126	Advice	Heat to trochanter (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over the side of your hip. Be careful that its not too hot, you may need to wrap it in a thin towel. The heat helps stimulate fresh blood flow to an area, to reduce inflammation and pain. This exercise is very useful to treat trochanteric bursitis.
			
Cardio			
CV001	All	Cycling	Get on to a bicycle (static bike, or normal road bike), and keep an upright posture. Do not attempt to get into a racing bike position unless advised by your therapist. Ensure your seat height and foot straps are adjusted to suit you. 
CV002	All	Cycling backwards	Get on to a static bicycle, and cycle backwards. Keep an upright posture. Do not attempt to get into a racing bike position unless advised by your therapist. Ensure your seat height and foot straps are adjusted to suit you. 
CV003	All	Recumbent cycling	Sit on a recumbent bicycle and cycle forwards. Hold on to the side bars if necessary, and you can adjust the angle of the back rest. 
CV004	All	Walking	Maintaining a good upright posture, walk. Concentrate on a heel-strike to toe-off action. Make sure you keep your head up, with your eyes on the horizon line. 
CV005	All	Walking on treadmill	Maintaining a good upright posture, walk. Concentrate on a heel-strike to toe-off action. Make sure you keep your head up, with your eyes on the horizon line.
CV006	All	Walking on treadmill backwards	Maintaining a good upright posture, walk backwards. Hold on to the safety bars when first starting.
CV007	All	Walking on treadmill sideways	Maintaining a good upright posture, walk sideways. Hold on to the safety bars when first starting.
CV008	All	Jogging	Maintaining a good upright posture, jog. 
CV009	All	Jogging on treadmill	Maintaining a good upright posture, jog on a treadmill. You can make the exercise harder by increasing the incline of the treadmill machine. 
CV010	All	Running on treadmill	Maintaining a good upright posture, speed up from a jog to a run on a treadmill. Make sure you keep your head up, with your eyes on the horizon line, and keep your shoulders relaxed as you move your arms to avoid tension in the shoulder muscles. You can make the exercise harder by increasing the incline of the treadmill machine. 
CV011	All	Jogging backwards	Jog backwards, and hold on to the bars when you first start. You should have good balance and co-ordination to do this exercise. 
CV012	All	Jogging side-ways	Jog sideways, and hold on to the bars when you first start. You should have good balance and co-ordination to do this exercise. 
CV013	All	Cross-trainer	Rotate the legs forwards and backwards on the cross-trainer. 
CV014	All	Rowing	Sit on a rowing machine, and row for a period of time as advised by your therapist. Ask your therapist or gym trainer about rowing technique if you are unsure. 
CV015	All	Stepper	Stand on a stepper machine, and simulate the stepping movement. Maintain good posture. 
CV016	All	Skipping	Hold a skipping rope between both hands, and skip using alternate legs so one foot lifts off the ground while jogging. To make it harder, skip by lifting both feet up at the same time. 
CV017	All	Walking upstairs	Maintaining good posture, walk upstairs. 
			
			
			
Core			
C001	All, shoulder stabilisation	4 Point kneeling	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine). If you want to make the exercise harder, just rock gently from one side to the other. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C002	All, shoulder stabilisation	3 Point kneeling	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine).  Gently lift one hand 2-3cm off the floor. Use your other shoulder to stabilise you. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C003	All, shoulder stabilisation	3 Point kneeling straight arm	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine).  Lift one arm in front of you. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C004	All, shoulder stabilisation	3 Point kneeling one knee	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine).  Lift one knee 2-3 cm from the floor. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C005	All, shoulder stabilisation	2 Point kneeling	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine). Lift one hand and the opposite knee 2-3cm off the floor. Use your other shoulder and leg to stabilise you. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C006	All, shoulder stabilisation	2 Point kneeling same side	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine). Lift one hand and your same-side knee 2-3cm off the floor. Use your other shoulder and leg to stabilise you. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C007	All, shoulder stabilisation	2 point kneeling horizontal	Adopt a 4 point position on your hands and knees. Maintain good posture, and gently contract the deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button in (towards your spine). Lift one arm in front of you, and your opposite leg behind you. This exercise strengthens the deep core muscles. 
C008	All, shoulder stability, lumbar spine stability, Swiss ball all	SB press-up hold medium	Gently roll onto the ball placing your knees on the ball. Support yourself with both palms flat on the ground, and hold this position. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your pelvis. To make the exercise harder, move the ball towards your feet. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works many muscles throughout the body. 
C009	All, shoulder stability, lumbar spine stability, Swiss ball all	SB press-up hold advanced	Gently roll onto the ball placing your knees on the ball. Support yourself with both palms flat on the ground, and hold this position. Lift one leg and hold this position. To make the exercise easier, move the ball towards your pelvis. To make the exercise harder, move the ball towards your feet. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works many muscles throughout the body. 
C010	All, lumbar stability, Swiss ball all	Forward ball roll basic	Kneeling down, with your elbows resting on a Swiss ball all, roll the ball forwards by straightening your arms. Maintain good posture. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works many muscles throughout the body. 
C011	All, lumbar stability, Swiss ball all	Forward ball roll advanced	Go on to your toes, with your elbows resting on a Swiss ball all, roll the ball forwards by straightening your arms. Maintain good posture. This is a tough exercise, so only do this when you have adequate core strength. 
C012	All, lumbar stability, Swiss ball all	Back on ball	Lie with your back on the ball, between your shoulder blades. Hold this position. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly in towards the spine. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also good for posture and co-ordination. 
C013	All, lumbar stability, Swiss ball all	Back on ball advanced	Lie with your back on the ball, between your shoulder blades. Wrap your arms around the ball. Straighten one leg and hold this position. Repeat to your other leg. To make the exercise more difficult, cross your arms over your chest. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works the hamstring and improves co-ordination and balance.  
C014	All, Swiss ball all	SB crab	Lie on the ball, with your arms outspread. Shuffle to one side, keeping your shoulder / back area in contact with the ball. Go as far to the side as possible, then shuffle back the other way. Make sure you keep good posture. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works many large and small muscles throughout the body. 
C015	All, hip flexion, Swiss ball all	SB stair climb	Start in a press-up hold position, with one foot on one ball and your other foot on the other ball. Bring your knee towards your chest, while your other leg straightens, and repeat to the other side. To make the exercise harder, make sure your toes are on the top of the ball. To make the exercise easier, place your shins on the ball. This is a core strengthening exercise, but also works many muscles throughout the body. It also takes a lot of co-ordination to control both balls and stay balanced! 
C016	All, Swiss ball all	Jack-knife	Start in a press-up hold position, rest your shins and ankles on the Swiss ball all while your hands are flat on the ground supporting the upper half of your body. Bring your knees towards your chest, and then straighten your legs. The exercise can be performed at different speeds, but start slowly to ensure you are comfortable.  
C017	All, Swiss ball all	Jack-knife single leg	Start in a press-up hold position, rest your shins and ankles on the Swiss ball all while your hands are flat on the ground supporting the upper half of your body. Lift one leg, and bring your knee towards your chest, and then straighten your leg. Perform a required number of repetitions, then swop legs. Its a super core strengthening exercise, but works many muscles throughout the body and improves co-ordination. But its a tough exercise, so make sure you already have a strong core. 
C018	All	Plank kneeling	Rest on your forearms and your knees. Hold this position. Keep good straight posture. This is a core strengthening exercise.
C019	All	Plank	Rest on your forearms and your toes. Hold this position. Keep good straight posture. This is a core strengthening exercise.
C020	All	Plank one leg	Rest on your forearms and your toes. Lift one straight leg. Hold this position. Keep good straight posture. This is a core strengthening exercise.
C021	All	Plank one arm	Rest on your forearms and your toes. Lift one forearm off the ground. Hold this position. Keep good straight posture. This is a core strengthening exercise.
C022	All, Swiss ball all	Plank on Swiss ball all	Rest your forearms on a Swiss ball all and hold this position. Keep good straight posture. This is a core strengthening exercise.
C023	All	Side plank	Lie on your side, and form a bridge between your feet and forearms (by lifting your pelvis). This exercise works the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
C024	All	Side plank kneeling	Lie on your side, and form a bridge between your knees and forearms (by lifting your pelvis). This exercise works the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
C025	All, hip abduction	Side plank advanced	Lie on your side, and form a bridge between your feet and forearms (by lifting your pelvis). Lift your leg away from your body, as well as your arm. This is a tough exercise, so only perform this if you have the required core strength. This exercise works the abdominal and oblique muscles. 
C026	All	Plank reverse	Lie face up, and rest on your forearms forming a bridge between your feet and your forearms (by lifting your pelvis). This is a good core and back strengthening exercise. 
C027	All	Dead lift	Use a bar or a dowel rod, and place them on some blocks. Bend your knees and squat down. Lift the bar by moving it up along the lines of your shins and thighs, and straighten up. 
C028	All, lower back extension, hip extension	Stiff leg dead lift	Keep your knees just slightly bent, shoulder width apart, and place a dowel rod or barbell on the blocks. You will likely have forward back bend in the spine at the bottom. Hold the bar shoulder width apart or slightly narrower, with one palm facing up, one palm down (or both palms facing down). Lift the bar up by extending the back. Keep the bar close to your shins during the movement. If you lack flexibility you may need to bend the knees a little. Squeeze she shoulder blades at the top of the movement. Return to the start position. 
C029	All, lower back extension, hip extension	Sumo dead lift	With a wide stance, go into a squat position and grasp the bar between your legs, with one palm facing up and one facing down. Straighten your legs as you extend the back into an upright position. Squeeze the shoulder blades at the top of the movement. Return to the start position. 
C030	All, lower back extension, hip extension	Romanian dead lift	Keep your knees just slightly bent, shoulder width apart, and place a dowel rod or barbell on the blocks. Keep your back straight/flat as you bend your knees more towards the bar. Hold the bar shoulder width apart or slightly narrower, with one palm facing up, one palm down (or both palms facing down). Lift the bar up by straightening the legs and extending the back at the same time. Keep the bar close to your shins during the movement. If you lack flexibility you may need to bend the knees a little. Squeeze she shoulder blades at the top of the movement. Return to the start position. 
C031	All, lower back extension, hip extension	Good morning	Place a dowel rod or bar on your upper back above your shoulder blades. Bend forwards, keeping the back straight, sticking out your bottom and bending your knees slightly. Keep the head looking forwards. 
C032	All	Lower abdominal strength 1	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, and hand under your lower back. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button towards the floor, and flattening your back against your hand. Hold the pressure against your hand for 10 seconds, and then relax. Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise. 
C033	All	Lower abdominal strength 2	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, and hand under your lower back. Lift one leg so the knee is pointing towards the ceiling. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button towards the floor, and flattening your back against your hand. Hold the pressure against your hand while you lower the leg to the floor, and back to the start position. Do not let the back arch. Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise. 
C034	All	Lower abdominal strength 3	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, and hand under your lower back. Lift one leg straight in the air so the foot is pointing towards the ceiling. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button towards the floor, and flattening your back against your hand. Hold the pressure against your hand while you lower the leg to the floor, and back to the start position. Do not let the back arch. Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise. 
C035	All	Lower abdominal strength 4	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, and hand under your lower back. Lift both feet so the knees are pointing towards the ceiling and your feet are off the floor. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button towards the floor, and flattening your back against your hand. Hold the pressure against your hand while you lower the legs to the floor, and back to the start position. Do not let the back arch. Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise. 
C036	All	Lower abdominal strength 5	Stand next to the corner of a wall, with good upright posture, on one leg. Activate your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button inwards, and flattening your back against the wall. Do not let the back arch, and maintain pressure against the wall while you swing your leg backwards and forwards. Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise that's functional in the standing position. 
C037	All	Lower abdominal strength 6	Lie flat on your back, with your hand under your lower back. Lift your legs as high as you can to 90 degrees. At this point, squeeze your tummy, drawing the belly inwards and down towards the floor, creating some pressure on your hand under your lower back. Slowly drop your legs downwards towards the floor, but the important point is to make sure you maintain that pressure on your hand under your back to keep the lower abdominals working hard. The slower and lower your legs go, the harder the exercise. 
C038	All	Lower abdominal strength 7	Lie flat on your back, with your knees bent, and hands by your side. Lift both legs so the knees are pointing towards the ceiling and your feet are off the floor. Contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing your belly button towards the floor, and flattening your back against the floor. Hold the pressure against the floor while you try to lift your knees just 1-2cm upwards, allowing only vertical movement of the thighs (do not let your back arch). Try to breathe normally throughout the exercise. This is a lower abdominal and deep core strengthening exercise. 
C039	All	Reverse crunch	Lie on your back on a bench or the floor. Hold on to a bar behind you. Draw your belly button inwards (towards the floor) and flatten your back against the bench. Bend your knees and contract your abdominal muscles bringing your knees towards your chest. 
C040	All, Swiss ball all	Reverse crunch SB	Lie on your back on a Swiss ball all. Hold on to a bar behind you. Draw your belly button inwards (towards the ball) and flatten your back against the ball. Bend your knees and contract your abdominal muscles bringing your knees towards your chest. This is a tough exercise, and you should have strong core muscles to do this. You can make the exercise harder by holding on with one hand. 
C041	All, shoulder adduction	Wood chop sitting	Sit on a bench, grab the handle of a cable machine with your hands. Draw your belly button inwards to contract the abdominal muscles, and keeping the arms fairly straight, pull the cable across the body so the handle ends up just outside the knee. 
C042	All, Swiss ball all, shoulder adduction	Wood chop sitting SB	Sit on a Swiss ball all, grab the handle of a cable machine with your hands. Draw your belly button inwards to contract the abdominal muscles, and keeping the arms fairly straight, pull the cable across the body so the handle ends up just outside the opposite knee. 
C043	All, Swiss ball all, shoulder adduction	Wood chop SB medicine ball	Sit on a Swiss ball all, grab a medicine ball with your hands. Draw your belly button inwards to contract the abdominal muscles, and keeping the arms fairly straight, pull the cable across the body so the handle ends up just outside the opposite knee. 
C044	All, shoulder adduction	Wood chop	Stand up with good posture, grab the handle of a cable machine, contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards towards the spine. The first movement is a side-shift away from the cable, by laterally moving the pelvis. Next, rotate the torso away from the cable, and finally with fairly straight arms, pull the cable across your body. This is a functional and effective multi-joint strengthening exercise. 
C045	All, shoulder abduction	Reverse wood chop sitting	Sit on a bench, grab a handle or medicine ball with your hands. Draw your belly button inwards to contract the abdominal muscles, and keeping the arms fairly straight, pull the cable across the body so the handle ends up above your opposite shoulder. 
C046	All, Swiss ball all, shoulder abduction	Reverse wood chop sitting SB	Sit on a Swiss ball all, grab a handle or medicine ball with your hands. Draw your belly button inwards to contract the abdominal muscles, and keeping the arms fairly straight, pull the cable across the body so the handle ends up above your opposite shoulder. 
C047	All, shoulder abduction	Reverse wood chop	Stand up with good posture, grab the handle of a cable machine (or medicine ball), contract your deep abdominal muscles by drawing the belly button inwards towards the spine. The first movement is a side-shift away from the cable, by laterally moving the pelvis. Next, rotate the torso away from the cable, and finally with fairly straight arms, pull the cable across your body so it ends up above your opposite shoulder. This is a functional and effective multi-joint strengthening exercise.  
C048	All, thoracic rotation, Swiss ball all	Medicine ball twist SB	Sit on a Swiss ball all. Draw your belly button in towards your spine, and rotate your body while holding a medicine ball or other suitable small weighted object. This core exercise predominantly strengthens your oblique muscles at your sides. 
C049	All, thoracic rotation	Medicine ball twist	Stand with your legs shoulder width apart, and your knees slightly bent to about 20 degrees. Draw your belly button in towards your spine, and rotate your body while holding a medicine ball or other suitable small weighted object. This core exercise predominantly strengthens your oblique muscles at your sides. 
C050	All	Cable crunch	Kneeling on the floor, or sitting on a bench, grasp the handle of a cable machine and hold it behind your head. Crunch by contracting your abdominal muscles to flex your spine forwards. 
C051	All	Oblique cable crunch	Kneeling on the floor, or sitting on a bench, grasp the handle of a cable machine and hold it over one shoulder. Crunch by contracting your abdominal muscles to flex and rotate your spine towards your opposite knee. This will also strengthen your oblique muscles at your sides. 
C052	All	Standing cable side-flexion	Grasp a cable above your shoulder, and keep your arms straight. Side-flex your back away from the cable to create resistance. Repeat to the opposite side. This is a core and back strengthening exercise. 
C053	All	Cross-crunch	Lie flat on your back, and bend your hips and knees so your feet are off the floor. Rotate your lower back and pelvis so your knees are resting on the floor. Do an oblique crunch by reaching forwards towards your knees, but as you do this, rotate your knees to the opposite side so you get a rotation in opposite directions from the pelvis and the upper body. This will contract your abdominal and oblique muscle groups. 
C054	All, shoulder stabilisation	Explosive oblique throw	Stand up with your knees slightly bend, hold onto a medicine ball. Rotate with your torso bringing the ball to your side, then rotate forwards to launch the ball. Use a partner to catch and throw the ball back to you. The key here is using the body to rotate and generate the power, not the arms. This is a core exercise that targets the oblique muscles, but works other areas in the body as well. 
C055	All	Sit-up throw	Sit and face your partner, feet touching, knees bent and back on the floor. Holding a medicine ball behind you, sit up and toss it to your partner. This is a good abdominal strengthening exercise. 
C056	All, hip flexion	Explosive leg raise	Lie flat on your back, grasping the legs of a partner. Raise your legs upwards towards the hands of your partner who will resist them, and push them back down. Control the legs at the bottom of the movement and repeat. This predominantly strengthens the lower abdominal muscles. 
C057	Other	Hiatus hernia self treatment	Drink pint of warm water first thing in the morning. Stand on your tip toes, and drop down suddenly to your heels, and repeat several times. The weight of the warm water helps to relax the diaphragm and stomach, as well as putting some weight in the stomach. This will bring the stomach down, and it may be enough to bring the hernia down. 
			
Ankle			
A001	Plantar flexion	Active plantar flexion one side	Sit on the floor (or lie down) with one leg bent, and one leg out straight. Point your toes of your straight leg downwards towards the ground. This exercise will mobilise the stiff ankle joint. 
A002	Plantar flexion	Active plantar flexion both sides	Sit on the floor (or lie down) with your legs out straight. Point your toes downwards towards the ground. This exercise will increase mobility in your ankle joints. 
A003	Plantar flexion	Heel raises sitting 	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. Slowly raise your legs up onto your toes. Hold, and gradually control the movement back down to the starting position. This is a useful calf pump exercise, as well as improving mobility of the ankle joints. 
A004	Plantar flexion, exercise band all	Resisted plantar flexion	Sit on the floor with your leg out straight. Place an exercise band around the ball of your foot, hold on to it with both hands, and push away creating resistance in the band. This exercise will help strengthen the calf muscle, and other muscles around the lower leg and ankle.  
A005	Plantar flexion, balance/proprioception, toes all	Tip toe walking	Walk on tip toes. Start by doing it in trainers, but when you get more confident do it in bare feet. Its a fantastic foot, ankle and leg strengthening exercise to both ligaments and muscles. It also helps improve balance. 
A006	Plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, balance/proprioception	Ball control	Sit upright in a chair. Place a ball underneath your foot. Practice moving the ball in different directions. Its a good control exercise for the ankle, especially after injury. 
A007	Plantar flexion, balance/proprioception, toes all	Calf raises two legs	Stand upright, hold onto a wall for balance if required. Slowly raise up onto your toes, and control the movement back down. This exercise will strengthen the calf muscles and ankle joints. 
A008	Plantar flexion, balance/proprioception, toes all	Calf raises two legs step	Stand on a step, hold onto a hand rail for balance if required. Slowly raise up onto your toes, and control the movement back down below the level of the step. This exercise will strengthen the calf muscles and ankle joints, but at the bottom of the movement put a stretch through the calves as well. 
A009	Plantar flexion, balance/proprioception, toes all	Calf raises one leg	Stand upright on one leg. Slowly raise up onto your toes, and control the movement back down. Hold on to a wall, chair or table for support. This exercise will strengthen the calf muscle and ankle joint. 
A010	Plantar flexion	Calf raise with knees bent two legs	Stand up with your knees bent, and rise up onto your toes and hold. Slowly control the movement back down. This is a strengthening exercise for the soleus (lower calf) muscle. 
A011	Plantar flexion	Calf raise with knees bent one leg	Stand up with your knee bent, and rise up onto your toes and hold. Slowly control the movement back down. This is a strengthening exercise for the soleus (lower calf) muscle.
A012	Plantar flexion	Calf raise with knees bent step two legs	Stand with your toes on the edge of a step with your knees bent. Rise up onto your toes and hold. Slowly control the movement back down. This is a strengthening and stretching exercise for the soleus (lower calf) muscle.
A013	Plantar flexion	Calf raise with knees bent step one legs	Stand with your toes on the edge of a step with your knee bent. Rise up onto your toes and hold. Slowly control the movement back down. This is a strengthening and stretching exercise for the soleus (lower calf) muscle.
A014	Plantar flexion	Calf raise step up	Step up onto the step, and drive your knee upwards towards the ceiling. You can if you wish progress to going onto tip toes (as shown in the photo). Slowly, lower yourself down off the step in a controlled movement. This is a strengthening exercise for the calf muscles and lower leg. 
A015	Plantar flexion	Passive plantar flexion	Sit with one leg over your opposite knee. With your hand gently pull the ankle towards you creating a stretch down your shin and the top of your ankle. 
A016	Plantar flexion	Heel sit one foot	Kneel down, with one leg underneath you. Sit back on the heel of your leg, feeling a stretch down your shin. 
A017	Plantar flexion	Heel sit two feet	Kneel down, sitting back on you heels. You should feel a stretch down your shins. 
A018	Plantar flexion, balance/proprioception, co-ordination all	Resisted plantar flexion with ball	Lie on the floor with your leg out straight in front of you. Place a goof ball (or a football) against the wall. Put the ball of your foot on the ball, keeping the heel of your foot on the ground. Push the ball against the wall. You will feel some pressure in your calf muscle. Its a useful exercise to improve control of your foot/ankle. 
A019	Plantar flexion	Plantar flexion sitting overpressure	Sitting in a chair, tuck your toes underneath your chair. Hold this position, pushing down slightly with your leg. You should feel a gentle stretch on the top of your foot, and maybe a stretch down the front of your shin. 
A020	Plantar flexion	Plantar flexion standing overpressure	Stand up and tuck the toes of your injured leg underneath you. Hold this position, pushing down slightly with your leg. You should feel a gentle stretch on the top of your foot, and maybe a stretch down the front of your shin. 
A021	Dorsiflexion	Active dorsiflexion one foot	Sit on the floor with your legs out straight. Bring your toes and foot towards you. This will create a stretch in the calf muscle, and improve mobility in the ankle. 
A022	Dorsiflexion	Active dorsiflexion in sitting two feet	Sit on the floor with your legs out straight. Bring your toes and feet towards you. Hold, then gradually control the movement back down. This will create a stretch in the calf muscle, and improve mobility in the ankles. 
A023	Dorsiflexion	Active dorsiflexion chair one foot	Sit down with your feet flat on the floor. Slowly lift your toes up, but keeping your heel on the ground. Hold, then gradually control the movement back down. This acts as a calf pump, but also mobilises the ankle joint. 
A024	Dorsiflexion, exercise band all	Resisted dorsiflexion lying	Wrap an exercise band around the top of your foot, and anchor the band. Bring your toes towards your shin, against the resistance of the band.  
A025	Dorsiflexion, exercise band all	Resisted dorsiflexion soleus	Wrap an exercise band around the top of your foot, and anchor the band. Bring your toes towards your shin, against the resistance of the band. 
A026	Dorsiflexion	Self-resisted dorsiflexion	Sit upright in a chair. Place one foot on top of the other. Lift your toes off the ground, towards your shin, against the resistance from your other foot.  
A027	Dorsiflexion, balance/proprioception	Heel walking	Walk forwards on your heels. Use a wall to provide support if required. This is a great foot and ankle strengthening exercise, and improves balance. 
A028	Dorsiflexion	Heel sit	Squat down, so your bottom is resting on your heels. You should feel a stretch from your toes under the bottom of your feet.
A029	Dorsiflexion	Dorsiflexion stretch with towel	Sitting on a chair, place a towel underneath the ball of your foot. Gently pull your toes towards you, with the towel. Hold this position, you should feel a stretch at the back of your leg, in your calf.
A030	Dorsiflexion	Gastrocnemius stretch	Stand facing a wall, with your feet together and your hands flat against the wall. Both your feet should be facing forwards and your back heel resting on the ground and your knees straight. You should feel a stretch to the leg at the back, in the calf muscles (known as the gastrocnemius).  
A031	Dorsiflexion	Soleus stretch	Stand facing a wall, place your one leg in front of you and your hands flat against the wall. Keep both heels on the ground, and both knees bent. Push your front knee forward towards the wall to feel a stretch in the lower back part of the leg (bottom of the calf muscle, known as the soleus). 
A032	Dorsiflexion	Passive dorsiflexion	Sitting on a chair, place one foot up onto the opposite thigh. With one hand around the ball of your foot gently pull the foot backwards (so your toes are pointing towards your chin). This is a mobility exercise for the ankle. 
A033	Dorsiflexion	Heel drop gastrocnemius stretch	Stand with you toes on the edge of a step or a box. Hold onto something stable for support of required. Drop your heels downwards. You should feel a stretch just below the back of the knee, in the calf (this part of the calf is known as the gastrocnemius). 
A034	Dorsiflexion	Heel drop soleus stretch	Stand with you toes on the edge of a step or a box, and knees bent slightly. Hold onto something stable for support of required. Drop your heels downwards. You should feel a stretch in the back of your leg, in the lower calf (known as the soleus). 
A035	Inversion	Active inversion	Lying flat on your back, move your foot inwards and upwards. This is a mobility exercise for the ankle. 
A036	Inversion	Active inversion sitting	In sitting, move your foot inwards and upwards. This is a mobility exercise for the ankle. 
A037	Inversion	Active inversion standing	In standing, move your foot inwards and upwards, keep your heel on the ground. This is a mobility exercise for the ankle. 
A038	Inversion	Active inversion bilateral 	In sitting, move your feet inwards and upwards, keeping your heels on the ground. This is a mobility exercise for the ankles. 
A039	Inversion	Self resisted inversion	In sitting, place your toes together, pressing inwards and upwards against the resistance of each other. This is a strengthening exercise for the ankle. 
A040	Inversion, exercise band all	Inversion with band	Tie an exercise band around a stable object. Wrap the other end around the inside of your foot. Move your foot inwards and upwards against the resistance of the band. This is a strengthening exercise for the ankle. 
A041	Inversion	Resisted inversion with ball	Place a goof ball or football against a wall. Lie down or sit down, and push your foot inwards against the ball. This is a strengthening exercise for the ankle. 
A042	Inversion	Passive inversion	Sitting on a chair, bend the leg of your injured foot up onto the thigh of your other leg. With both hands gently pull your foot inwards and upwards towards you. This exercise will help improve mobility to the ankle. 
A043	Inversion	Passive inversion with towel sitting	Sitting in a chair wrap a towel around the ball of your foot. Pull your foot inwards and upwards with the towel. This will mobilise your ankle, and create a stretch in the outside lower part of your leg. 
A044	Inversion	Passive inversion with towel lying	Lying down, wrap a towel around the ball of your foot. Pull your foot inwards and upwards with the towel. This will mobilise your ankle, and create a stretch in the outside lower part of your leg. 
A045	Inversion, plantar flexion	Tibialis anterior stretch 1	Sit down on your foot, with the sole of your foot facing up towards your bottom. Make sure your foot is turned inwards too. You should feel a stretch on the outside of the lower part of the leg (shin). 
A046	Inversion, plantar flexion	Tibialis anterior stretch 2	Stand with one leg behind you, and the ankle bent down so the toes are pointing towards the floor. Push the leg forwards, as if you were to roll on the outside of your ankle, and feel a mild stretch to the outside front of the lower leg (shin). 
A047	Inversion, plantar flexion	Peroneus stretch	Sitting, place your foot on your opposite knee, and pull the ankle towards you creating a mild stretch to the outside of the lower part of the leg. 
A048	Eversion	Active eversion sitting	In sitting, move your foot outwards and upwards. This will improve mobility to your ankle. 
A049	Eversion	Active eversion unilateral standing	In standing, move your foot outwards and upwards, keep you heel on the ground. This will improve mobility to your ankle. 
A050	Eversion	Active eversion bilateral	In sitting, move your feet outwards and upwards, keep you heels on the ground. This will improve mobility to your ankles. 
A051	Eversion	Self resisted eversion	Sitting on a chair, cross your feet keeping your heels on the floor. Push the outside of your feet against each other. This is a strengthening exercise for your ankles. 
A052	Eversion, exercise band all	Eversion with band	Tie an exercise band around a stable object, and tie the other end around the outside of your foot. Move you foot outwards and upwards against the resistance of the band. This is a strengthening exercise for your ankle. 
A053	Eversion, exercise band all	Eversion bilateral with band	Tie an exercise band around both feet, and turn them outwards and upwards using the band as resistance. This is a strengthening exercise for your ankles. 
A054	Eversion	Resisted eversion with ball	Place a goof ball or football against a wall. Lie down or sit down, and push your foot outwards against the ball. This is a strengthening exercise for your ankle. 
A055	Eversion	Passive eversion	Sitting on a chair, bend the leg of your injured foot up onto the thigh of your other leg. With both hands gently pull your foot outwards and upwards away from your body, to improve mobility to your ankle. 
A056	Eversion	Passive eversion with towel sitting	Sitting on a chair, wrap a towel around the arch of your foot. Pull your foot outwards and upwards with the towel, to improve mobility to your ankle.
A057	Eversion	Passive eversion with towel lying	Lying down, wrap a towel around the arch of your foot. Pull your foot outwards and upwards with the towel, to improve mobility to your ankle.. 
A058	Eversion, balance/proprioception	Walking on outside of feet	Bare foot walking on the outside of your feet. Be careful not to lose balance, so proceed slowly. This is a great exercise to help train the arch of your foot, and to build muscle and ligament strength around the foot and ankle. 
A059	Balance/proprioception	Straight-line walking	Walk slowly in a straight line, placing one foot in front of the other, and vice versa. Try to walk in a straight line. Try to look straight ahead of you, and not down at your feet. This is a great co-ordination and balance exercise. 
A060	Balance/proprioception	BOSU ball heel raises	Standing on the curved side of a BOSU ball, raise your heels up off the cushion, onto your toes. Control the movement back down. The instability of the ball will improve your balance, as well as strengthen your hip, knee, foot and ankle muscles. 
A061	Balance/proprioception	BOSU ball toe raises	Standing on the curved side of a BOSU ball, raise your toes up off the cushion, onto your heels. Control the movement back down. The instability of the ball will improve your balance, as well as strengthen your hip, knee, foot and ankle muscles. 
A062	Balance/proprioception	Wobble board heal raises	Standing with both feet, shoulder width apart on a wobble board. Raise your heels up off the board, onto your toes. Control the movement back down. Be careful and hold on to a wall for support when you first start this exercise. The instability of the wobble board will improve your balance, as well as strengthen leg, ankle and foot muscles.  
A063	Balance/proprioception	Wobble board two feet	Stand on a wobble board, with both feet, shoulder width apart. Try to keep your balance. This will improve ligament and muscle strength around your knees and ankles. 
A064	Balance/proprioception	Wobble board one foot	Stand with one foot on the wobble board. Try to keep your balance. Be careful and hold on to a wall for support when you first start this exercise. This exercise will improve ligament and muscle strength around your knees and ankles. 
A065	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand	Stand on one leg, try to keep your balance. Be careful and hold on to a wall for support when you first start this exercise. A single leg balance exercise such as this is an enormously valuable exercise, and its benefits including strengthening the muscles and ligaments around the ankles and knees, and improving balance. 
A066	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand eyes closed	Stand on one leg with your eyes closed. Try to keep your balance. Be very careful and hold on to a wall for support when you first start this exercise. A single leg balance exercise with your eyes closed is an enormously valuable and quite difficult exercise, and should not be thought of lightly, it has many benefits including strengthening the muscles and ligaments around the ankles and knees, improving balance, and co-ordination. 
A067	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand with towel	Roll up a towel, place it on the floor. Stand with your foot across the towel on one leg. Try to keep your balance. To progress, close your eyes. Be careful and hold on to a wall for support when you first start this exercise. This exercise will improve your balance and strength throughout your leg. 
A068	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand knee touch	Stand on one leg, and bend your knee up to 90 degrees while your opposite hand touches the outside of your knee. Try to hold this position for 5 seconds and repeat the other side. Its a great strengthening exercise especially to the quadricep (thigh) muscle, but also improves balance. 
A069	Balance/proprioception	One leg swing, forwards and backwards	Stand on your injured leg. Swing your other leg forwards and backwards. Hold onto support if required. 
A070	Balance/proprioception	One leg swing sideways	Stand on your injured leg. Swing your other leg side to side. Hold onto support if required.
A071	Balance/proprioception	Ball control standing	Stand and place your injured leg on the top of a ball. Move the ball in different directions.
A072	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand forward reach	Stand on one leg. Keeping your back straight, lean forward, bending your knee to touch the ground in front of you with both hands. Return to an upright position. This exercise can be tough so keep it within your comfort zone. It improves strength, balance and co-ordination in your leg. 
A073	Balance/proprioception	Wobble board sitting	Sitting on a chair, place a wobble board underneath your injured foot. Move your foot in different directions, gradually putting more weight through the foot. This is a nice easy exercise to start improving your balance and co-ordination of your foot and ankle. 
A074	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand catching ball	Stand on your injured leg, throw and catch a ball against the wall. If you have a partner, ask them to throw the ball to you. The added force from the ball puts you off balance, making this exercise functional and challenging.
A075	Balance/proprioception	One leg stand BOSU ball catching ball	Stand on a BOSU ball curved side up on one leg. throw and catch a ball against the wall. If you have a partner, ask them to throw the ball for you. To progress: turn the BOSU ball over to stand on the flat side, or use a wobble board. This is a really challenging exercise, and improves co-ordination and leg strength. 
A076	Balance/proprioception	Catching ball BOSU ball (flat side)	Stand on the flat side of the BOSU ball. Try to keep your balance while a partner throws a ball to you. If you do not have a partner, throw a soft ball against a wall and attempt to catch it. Its a tough exercise and you will need to have good control and balance through the ankles, knees and legs. 
A077	Balance/proprioception	Standing on BOSU ball (curved side)	Stand on the curved side of the BOSU ball, feet shoulder width apart. Try to keep your balance. 
A078	Balance/proprioception	Standing on BOSU ball (flat side)	Stand on the flat side of the BOSU ball, feet shoulder width apart. Try to keep your balance. Be careful and use a wall for support if required.
A079	Balance/proprioception	Standing one leg on BOSU ball (curved side)	Stand on the curved side of the BOSU ball on one leg. Try to keep your balance. Be careful and use a wall for support if required. This is an excellent way to improve balance and leg strength. 
A080	Balance/proprioception	Standing one leg on BOSU ball (flat side)	Stand on the flat side of the BOSU ball on one leg. Try to keep your balance. This is a very difficult and advanced balance exercise so be careful and use a wall or chair for support first.
A081	Balance/proprioception	Tip toe standing 	In standing, raise your heels off the ground, onto your toes. Try to keep your balance. Be careful and use a wall for support if required. This exercise predominantly strengthens the calf muscle, but also improves balance. 
A082	Balance/proprioception	Tip toe stand one leg	Stand on one leg, raise your heels off the ground, onto your toes. Try to keep your balance, its more difficult than it looks. Be careful and use a wall for support if required. This exercise predominantly strengthens the calf muscle, but also improves balance. 
A083	Balance/proprioception	Non-weight bearing with towel	Lying on your back, next to a wall. Place a towel underneath your inured foot, with your foot flat against the wall. Move the towel up and down the wall. 
A084	Balance/proprioception, Swiss ball all	Non-weight bearing with gym ball	Lying on your back, next to a wall. Push your foot into a gym ball, goof ball or football, with the ball up against the wall. Use increasing amounts of pressure towards the wall to make the exercise more challenging. You will feel your leg working to stabilise the ball. 
A085	Balance/proprioception	Side-step	Stand with your feet together, and step to the side, and then back to the start position, then to the other side. Its a useful co-ordination exercise during ankle and knee rehabilitation. 
A086	Balance/proprioception	Side step across	Stand with your legs shoulder-width apart, and step across (in front) of your other leg, then return to the start position and repeat to the other side. Its a useful co-ordination exercise during ankle and knee rehabilitation. 
A087	Balance/proprioception	360 degree turn	Turn around in a full circle, taking small steps, and looking straight ahead of you. Make sure you finish at the same point on the floor as where you started. Go clockwise, then anti-clockwise. This exercise improves co-ordination and ankle control. 
A088	Other, plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, eversion	Ankle circles	Lying on your back or sitting, move your ankles around in circles both anti-clockwise and clockwise. This is a great mobility exercise to the ankle, and very useful for ankle stiffness following a sprain. 
A089	Other	Plantar fascia massage	Place a tennis ball or golf ball underneath the sole of your foot. Roll the golf ball up and down along the foot. Pay particular attention to the skin under the arch of the foot. Do not rub the ball over the heel of the foot. This will help reduce tension in the plantar fascia, the tissue under the sole of the foot that causes heel pain. 
A090	Advice	Ice outside of ankle	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas on the outside of your ankle to reduce inflammation and swelling. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A091	Advice	Ice inside of ankle	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas on the inside of your ankle reduce inflammation and swelling. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A092	Advice	Ice the calf (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas on the back of the leg over the calf reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A093	Advice	Ice the plantar fascia	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas under the heel while sitting to reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A094	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Crutches - how to measure	Its important to adjust the crutch to the correct height as crutches that are too short or too tall can put you off balance or cause strain to other areas such as the back. First, put your shoes on. Then place the crutch next to your leg, and make sure the handle is level with the bony part of hip (along the same line as your pubic region). Next make sure the forearm rest is just below the elbow crease. 
A095	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Crutches - how to walk if you cannot weight bear on one leg	Place the crutches in front of you, and then move your weaker limb forward, then bear all your weight down through the crutches and move your stronger unaffected limb forward. Repeat. This is an excellent method of walking if you cannot put any weight through one leg. 
A096	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Crutches - how to walk if you cannot weight bear through both legs	Advance both crutches forward then, while bearing all your weight down through both crutches, swing both legs forward at the same time past the crutches. This is energy consuming and requires good upper body strength, so if you cannot do this, you should consider a wheelchair.  
A097	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Crutches - walking with weakness/poor co-ordination in both legs	Use the left crutch, then your right foot, then the right crutch, then your left foot. Then repeat. This method provides excellent stability as there are always three points of contact with the ground. 
A098	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	One crutch - how to walk	Hold the crutch on the side of the non-affected leg. Its common to want to use the crutch on the injured side, but this doesn't tend to be as supportive. When walking swing the crutch through as you step with the affected side. The crutch and your foot should hit the floor at the same time. Then step through with the unaffected leg. 
A099	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Walking up and down stairs	When walking upstairs, always step with the good leg first, and then follow with the affected leg. When walking downstairs, always walk with the affected leg first, and then follow with the good leg. Remember this saying: Up with the good, and down with the bad. Or: the good go to heaven, the bad go to hell! 
A100	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Walking up and down stairs with one crutch	Always try to use one crutch and hold on to a side-rail when walking up and down stairs. To go up, bring your good leg up first, and your affected leg up afterwards, and last bring your crutch onto the step. To go down, first place your crutch on the step below, then bring your affected leg down a step, then your good leg.
A101	Other, advice, knee advice, hip advice	Walking up and down stairs with two crutches	Always try to use one crutch and hold on to a side-rail when walking up and down stairs. But if this is not possible, use two crutches. First take a step up with your good leg, then follow it up with the affected leg, then bring both crutches up to the same step. To go down, place the crutches on the step below, then your affected leg, and finally your good leg. 
A102	Advice, knee advice	Ice the calf (prone)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas on the back of the leg over your calf to reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A103	Advice, knee advice	Heat to the calf (prone)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle on the back of the leg over your calf to stimulate blood flow and reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the heat pack in a thin towel so its not too hot.
A104	Advice, knee advice	Ice the shin (sitting)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your shin to reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
A105	Advice, knee advice	Heat to the shin (sitting)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your shin to stimulate blood flow and reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the heat pack in a thin towel so its not too hot. You may also find it useful to elevate the leg to further reduce swelling. 
A106	Advice, knee advice	Ice the shin (supine)	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your shin to reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A107	Advice, knee advice	Heat to the shin (supine)	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your shin to stimulate blood flow and reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the heat pack in a thin towel so its not too hot.
A108	Advice	Ice to the Achilles	Place an ice pack or pack of frozen peas over your Achilles to reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the ice in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
A109	Advice	Heat to the Achilles	Place a heat pack or hot water bottle over your Achilles to stimulate blood flow and reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure you wrap the heat pack in a thin towel so its not too hot.
			
Toes			
TOE001	Flexion	Toe flexion	Bend your toe(s) downwards. This will help improve mobility of your toes. 
TOE002	Flexion	Toe flexion both sides	Bend your toe(s) downwards. This will help improve mobility to your toes.
TOE003	Flexion	Toe flexion passive	Using your hand, bend your toe(s) downwards. This will help improve mobility to your toe.
TOE004	Flexion	Big toe bend	Bend your big toe downwards. Mobility in the big toe is very important for foot function, and doing this exercise will help improve mobility. 
TOE005	Flexion	Towel pick-up	Try to pick up a towel using your toes. This exercise will help improve strength in your toes and intrinsic foot muscles. 
TOE006	Flexion	Big toe flexion band	Place a thin band around your big toe, and push the toe downwards creating resistance in the band. This exercise will help you gain strength and mobility to your big toe. 
TOE007	Extension	Toe extension	Bend your toe(s) upwards. This will help improve mobility to your toes.
TOE008	Extension	Toe extension both sides	Bend your toe(s) upwards. This will help improve mobility to your toes.
TOE009	Extension	Toe extension passive	Using your hand, bend your toe(s) upwards. This will help improve mobility to your toes.
TOE010	Extension	Big toe extension band	Place a thin band around your big toe, and pull the toe upwards creating resistance in the band.
TOE011	Extension	Big toe stretch	Place your big toe over a step and drop your foot down to bend your big toe upwards. Hold this stretch. Mobility in the big toe is very important for foot function, and doing this exercise will help improve mobility. 
TOE012	Abduction	Toe abduction band	Place a band around your toes, and open them outwards. This exercise will help improve strength in your toes and intrinsic foot muscles. 
TOE013	Abduction	Big toe abduction	Try to learn to move your big toe away from the other toes. Its difficult and may take some practice to learn to activate the muscles to do this. You may find it useful to move the big toe using your fingers to assist you. This will help strengthen the big toe muscles, reducing the likelihood of bunions. 
TOE014	Abduction	Big toe abduction passive	Move your big toe away from your other toes using your fingers. This is a useful mobility exercise for the big toe, especially for those at risk of bunions. 
TOE015	Adduction	Toe adduction squeeze	Place some wedges or cotton buds between your toes, and squeeze inwards. This exercise will help improve strength in your toes and intrinsic foot muscles. 
TOE016	Advice	Ice to the toes	Apply an ice pack or frozen peas over the toes to reduce pain and inflammation. Wrap the pack in a thin towel so its not too cold. 
TOE017	Advice	Heat to the toes	Apply a heat pack or hot water bottle over the toes to reduce pain and inflammation. Wrap the pack in a thin towel so its not too hot.  
			
Pilates			
P001	All, Set-up positions	Finding neutral	Lie on your back with your feet and knees hip distance apart, with your arms by your side. Place your thumbs and index fingers together to form a diamond shape, and place it over your lower abdomen. Your fingers touch your pubic bone, and the base of your thumbs rest next to your belly button. Find neutral by tilting your pelvis and make sure your diamond is parallel to the floor. 
P002	All, Set-up positions	Lateral breathing	Breathe into the lower back aspect of your ribcage, so that your ribs move laterally. Make sure you are not breathing from the upper rib cage, or the abdomen. 
P003	All, Set-up positions	Rib cage placement	Soften your ribs, to make them lower to the ground and in line with the pelvis. Do not force the mid-back into the floor. 
P004	All, Set-up positions	Shoulder blade placement	Glide your shoulder blades gently down and inwards to the spine, to allow your collar bone and chest to widen. Do not squeeze the shoulder blades together. 
P005	All, Set-up positions	Head and neck placement	Lengthen the crown of your head away from your tail bone to create a sense of length through the spine. Avoid poking your chin towards the ceiling. 
P006	All, Set-up positions	Cantering	Lie on your back with your feet and knees hip distance apart, with your arms by your side. Place your thumbs and index fingers together to form a diamond shape, and place it over your lower abdomen. Your fingers touch your pubic bone, and the base of your thumbs rest next to your belly button. Find neutral by tilting your pelvis and make sure your diamond is parallel to the floor. Imagine a belt sitting below your belly button tightening, as you gently contract your lower abdominal muscles. 
P007	All, Set-up positions	The compass	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Lengthen your arms out to the side, relaxed on the floor. Imagine a compass is on your lower abdomen, your navel being North, your pubic bone South with your prominent bones either side are East and West. Breathe out whilst tilting your pelvis North, tucking your bottom in, and pressing your lower back into the floor. Breathe in as you tilt your pelvis South, allowing your lower back to slightly arch. Return to your starting position, with your pelvis in neutral. Breathe out as you tilt your pelvis West, lifting the opposite side of the pelvis off the floor, slightly rotating. Breathe in whilst tilting the pelvis East, again allowing the opposite side to slightly rotate and lift off the floor. Return to your starting position, with your pelvis in neutral. 
P008	All, Set-up positions	Supine start position	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and the soles of your feet firmly on the floor. Place your hands on your lower abdomen, with your elbows bent resting on the floor. Allow your spine to lengthen and relax. Encourage areas of the body in contact with the mat to feel heavy and supported. Soften your thighs and hips, and widen your chest. Lengthen your neck and relax your jaw and face. 
P009	All, Set-up positions	Standing alignment	Position your feet and knees parallel to your hips, with equal weight between the balls of your feet and your heels, lengthen the crown of your head away from your tail bone. Relax your shoulders and gently widen the collar bones. Position your pelvis in neutral. Engage your deep abdominal muscles by imagining your are tightening a belt below your belly button to feel a gentle contraction. 
P010	All, Set-up positions	Pilates stance	"Stand tall on the floor, with your heels together and your feet slightly turned out from your hips to make a small ""V"". Transfer your weight evenly through the soles of the feet. Connect your inner thighs and allow your arms to lengthen down the sides of your body. Balance your pelvis in neutral and maintain the natural curves of your spine. "
P011	All, Set-up positions	Prone starting positions	Lie on your stomach, and rest your forehead on the back of your hands. Your feet and knees should be parallel to your hips. Lengthen your neck and gently draw the shoulder blades towards the spine. If there is discomfort in your lower spine, place a small folded towel under your abdomen for extra support. Keep your pelvis in neutral by avoiding flattening or arching your lower back, but your lower back should feel lengthened. 
P012	All, Set-up positions	Four point kneeling	Kneel on all fours on the mat. Place your hands directly underneath your shoulders, with your knees beneath your hips. Lengthen your arms, but avoid locking your elbows. Keep your abdominal muscles contracted. As you breathe out, tilt your pelvis backwards allowing your lower back to round. As you breathe in, lengthen the spine and tilt the pelvis forward, allowing your back to arch slightly. A neutral position is neither tucked nor arched (picture 3). Do not allow your head to drop below the level of your spine. 
P013	All, Set-up positions	Seated start position	Sit upright on the mat, bend your knees with your hips turned out and soles of the feet together. Keep your feet a fair distance from your body. Place your hands on your shins, with your elbows slightly bent. Lengthen your spine, maintaining natural curves. Make sure your weight is balanced between the centre of your sitting bones. If you have difficulty sitting with a neutral pelvis and spine in this position, try sitting on a cushion. 
P014	All, Set-up positions	Side lying starting position	Lie on one side, with both knees bent in front of you so that your hips and knees are at right angles, and your arms in front of you together. Lengthen your top waistband to create a small space between your waste and the mat. Contract your deep abdominal muscles, and find a neutral position of your pelvis. 
P015	All	Rest position / Child's pose	Kneel down on the mat, with your buttocks on your heels. Keeping your buttocks on your heels, roll forwards and slide your arms forwards creating a gentle stretch and lengthening in your back.  
P016	All	Chin tucks	Adopt the supine start position. As you breathe out lengthen the back of your neck, tipping your chin down and keeping your head in contact with the floor. As you breathe in tip your head back slightly, passing through the mid position. This is a small subtle movement. 
P017	All	Neck rolls 	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe out, keeping your neck released and roll your head to one side. Keep your head in contact with the floor. Breathe in as your bring your neck into the centre. 
P018	All	Zip and abdominal hollowing	Sit upright on a chair, with your feet flat on the floor. As you breathe in lengthen your spine. Breathe out as you 'zip' from the back to the front of your pelvic floor region, feeling your abdominals beginning to hollow and tighten slightly. Continue to breathe out fully as you increase the hollowing of the abdominal area, but do not over engage the abdominal muscles. Maintain the connection whilst breathing normally for five breaths, before releasing. 
P019	All	Leg slides	Adopt the supine start position. As you breathe out slide one leg away along the floor, keeping your pelvis and spine in neutral. Breathe in as you return the leg to starting position. Repeat with the opposite leg. Maintain your neutral pelvis and centre.
P020	All	Knee openings	Adopt the supine start position. As you breathe out, allow one knee to open slowly to the side. Keep your foot on the mat, allowing it to roll onto the outside. Open as far as you can without moving the pelvis. Breath in as you bring the leg back to the starting position. Maintain your neutral pelvis and centre. 
P021	All	Knee folds	Adopt the supine start position. As you breathe out lift one foot off the mat, bringing the knee up towards the body. Allow the weight of the leg to drop into the hip socket. Breathe in as you maintain this position. Breathe out as you slowly return the leg back to the starting position. Maintain your neutral pelvis and centre.
P022	All	Double knee folds	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe out as you float your right leg to form a right angle with the hip and knee, off the mat. Breathe in to hold, and breathe out to float the other leg into the same position. Maintain a neutral spine. Breathe in, maintaining your position and as your breathe out slowly lower your right leg down to the floor followed by the left leg. Do not allow your abdominals to bulge or your pelvis to lose neutral. 
P023	All	Shoulder bridge / Spine curls	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe out as you tuck your pelvis underneath you, pressing your lower back into the floor. Slowly roll your spine off the mat one vertebrae at a time to the tips of your shoulder blades. Hold this position as you breathe in. Breathe out, rolling the spine back down, one vertebrae at a time. Make sure you keep your weight equal through both feet. 
P024	All	Curl Ups	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe out as you lengthen the back of your neck and nod your head forward, curling up the upper body. Keep the back of your lower ribcage in contact with the floor, with your head relaxed into your hands. Do not allow your abdominals to bulge, and keep your pelvis neutral. Breathe out, as you slowly return back to your starting position. 
P025	All	Curl Ups and leg reaches	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe out as you lengthen the back of your neck and nod your head forward curling the upper body, as you straighten one knee, with your foot pointing towards the ceiling. Keep the back of your lower ribcage in contact with the floor, with your head relaxed into your hands. Do not allow your abdominals to bulge. Breathe out, as you slowly return back to your starting position. 
P026	All	Ribcage closure	Adopt the supine start position. Breathe in as you raise both arms out straight in front of you, palms facing forwards. Breathe out as you maintain a stable spine, reaching both arms over your head towards the floor. Allow the ribcage to soften and close. Breathe in as you return your arms above your chest, feeling your chest opening. Breathe out as you lower your arms, back down to your sides. 
P027	All	Spinal flexion	Adopt your standing alignment. Breathe out and begin to roll the spine forwards, with the nose moving towards the breast bone. Roll your middle and lower back forwards, and allow your pelvis to roll forwards. Keep your weight even through your feet. As you breathe out, roll your spine up by starting from the tail bone. 
P028	All	The Cat	Adopt the four point kneeling position. Place your hands directly underneath your shoulders, with your knees between your hips. Breathe out as you tuck your pelvis underneath you, gently rounding your lower back. Continue this movement, allowing your upper back to round, followed by your neck, allowing it to nod slightly forward. Breathe in and maintain this position. Breathe out as you slowly flatten out your spine, sending the tailbone away from you, lengthening your spine and neck back to neutral. 
P029	All	Seated C-curve	Adopt the seated start position. Place your hands behind your thighs, with your elbows slightly bent. If you find this uncomfortable sit on a cushion, or rolled up towel. Breathe in as you tuck your pelvis and lower spine underneath you. Roll your head, neck and upper back forward, curling your spine forward. Breathe out as you return to your starting position.
P030	All	Prone cobra	Lie on your stomach with your arms by your sides, and squeeze the shoulder blades towards each other, and lift your arms behind you. You can make the exercise harder by turning the hands outwards/upwards so the palms face the ceiling. 
P031	All	Seated waist twist	Adopt the seated start position. Fold your arms in front of your chest just below shoulder height. As you breathe out twist your torso to the left, and allow your head to follow. Breathe in as you rotate back to your starting position. Lengthen the crown of your head throughout and maintain a neutral pelvis.
P032	All	Standing waist twist	Adopt your standing alignment. Fold our arms in front of your chest just below shoulder height. As you breathe out twist your torso to the left, and allow your head to follow. Breathe in as you rotate back to your starting position. Lengthen the crown of your head throughout and maintain a neutral pelvis.
P033	All	Seated side reach	Sit upright with your knees slightly bent and turned out, with the soles of your feet together. Breathe in as you raise your right arm out to the side and overhead. Breathe out as you reach up and over, leading with your head, bending your spine to the left. Breathe in, maintaining the length of your spine. Breathe out as you return to your starting position, with your arms by your side. 
P034	All	Standing side reach	Stand tall  on the floor, lengthen your spine, with your legs hip-width apart. Breathe in as you raise your right arm out to the side and overhead. Breathe out as you reach up and over, leading with your head, bending your spine to the left. Breathe in, maintaining the length of your spine. Breathe out as you return to your starting position, with your arms by your side. 
P035	All	Shoulder drops	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Breathe in as you reach one arm up towards the ceiling, bringing your shoulder blade off the floor. Breathe out as you release your arm back down, returning the shoulder blade onto the floor.  To progress, raise both arms at the same time. 
P036	All	Arm circles	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Breathe out as you raise both arms in front of you and overhead. Breathe in as you circle your arms out to the side and down to your body.
P037	All	Arm windows	Lie on your back, with you knees bent and feet flat on the floor, and arms together in the air. Breathe out as you bend both elbows towards the floor, and bring the hands back to the floor. Outreach your arms above your head while breathing out, and return them above your chest as you breathe back in. 
P038	All	Knee Circles	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Bring your right knee in towards you as far as possible without disturbing the pelvis. Slowly make circle movements with the knee. To finish return to the starting position. 
P039	All	Oblique curl ups	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor.  Breathe out as you curl up your neck and upper body whilst rotating your head and torso towards the right. Breathe in as you maintain this position. Breathe out as you slowly roll your spine back to the centre. 
P040	All	Hip rolls	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Breathe in, rotate your pelvis and legs towards the right, peeling the left side of your pelvis off the floor. Breathe out as you return to your starting position.
P041	All	Hip rolls with feet up	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Bring your knees up straight out in front of you, at right angles to the floor. Keep your lower back in contact with floor. Breathe in, rotate your pelvis and legs towards the right, peeling the left side of your pelvis off the floor. Breathe out as you return to your starting position.
P042	All	Floating arms	Stand tall  on the floor, lengthen your spine, with your legs hip-width apart. Breathe out raise both arms out to the side, slightly forward and up above your body. Breathe in as you lower the arms back down the same pathway. 
P043	All	Table top	Kneel on all fours on the mat. Place your hands directly underneath your shoulders, with your knees between your hips. Breathe out as you slide one  leg behind you, keeping it in line with your hip and your pelvis in neutral. Keep your foot pointed and in contact with the floor. Breathe in as you lengthen and lift your leg to hip height. At the same time raise the opposite arm forwards to shoulder height. Breathe out as you lower your leg to the floor and return your arm back to the starting position. Breathe in, as you slide your leg back to the starting position.
P044	All	Diamond press	Lie on your stomach, place your finger tips together, palms down on the mat and open your elbows. Rest your forehead on the back of your hands. If there is discomfort in your lower spine, place a small folded towel under your abdomen for extra support. Breathe our as you lift your head, then your neck and chest off the floor. Keep your lower ribs in contact with the floor. Breathe in as you hold this position. Breathe out as you return to your starting position.
P045	All	Dart	Lie on your front, rest your forehead on a small cushion, lengthening your arms by your sides, palms facing up. Breathe out as you lift your head, the your neck, chest and upper spine off the floor. Keep your lower ribs in contact with the floor. Lengthen your arms away and lift them slightly as you turn your palms in towards your body. Breathe in as you hold this position. Breathe out as you return sequentially to your starting position. 
P046	All	Sitting bow and arrow 	Sit upright with your knees bent, with the soles of your feet on the ground. Keep your inner thighs connected. Reach your arms out straight in front of you at shoulder height. Breathe out as you bend your left elbow towards your body with your left hand towards your left shoulder. At the same time rotate your head, neck and upper spine to the left. Breathe in as you straighten the left elbow, and encourage more rotation in the spine. Breathe out as you rotate your spine back to neutral, and bring your arm back to your starting position.
P047	All	Lying bow and arrow	Lie on your right side, with a cushion underneath your head. Bend both knees in front of you so they are at right angles with your hips. Lengthen both arms out in front of you at shoulder height, with your right arm resting on to of your left. Breathe in as you bend your left elbow and slide your hand along the inside of your right arm. At the same time rotate your head, neck and upper spine to the left. Breathe out as you rotate further to the left. Breathe in as you straighten your left arm, lengthening your forearm away from your body. Breathe out as you return your spine to neutral and lengthen your left arm out straight back t your starting position.
P048	All	Arm openings	Lie on your right side, with a cushion underneath your head. Bend both knees in front of you so they are at right angles with your hips. Lengthen both arms out in front of you at shoulder height, with your right arm resting on top of your left. Breathe in as you raise your top arm , keeping it straight, lifting it above your shoulder joint towards the ceiling. At the same time roll your head, neck and upper spine to face the ceiling. Breathe out as you continue  to rotate your spine further, taking your arm with your, lowering it down towards the mat. Breathe in as you rotate your spine back initiating the movement from your centre, bringing your arm back above your shoulder joint towards the ceiling. Breathe out as you rotate your spine back to your starting position.
P049	All	Tennis ball rising	Stand tall on the floor, lengthen your spine, place a tennis ball in-between your ankles. If required stand close to a wall for support. Breathe out and rise up onto the balls of your feet lifting your heels off the ground, maintain the position of the ball. Breathe in controlling your heels back down to the ground. Breathe out as you bend your knees, pressing your heels firmly on the floor. Breathe in as your straighten your knees, returning to your starting position.
P050	All	Single leg stretch	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Bring both feet off the floor, bringing your knees towards you, at right angles to your hips. Keep your lumbar spine connected with the floor. Breathe out as you lower your right leg to the floor, keeping your knee bent, touching the ground with your toes. At the same time place your right hand on your left knee. Slide your right foot along the mat, straightening it out in line with your hip, as you slowly bring the left knee in towards you. Breathe in, maintaining your curled position, slide the right leg back into the body, and return to your starting position.
P051	All	Double leg stretch	Lie on your back, with your knees bent, feet flat on the floor and arms by your sides, palms facing downwards. Breathe out as you nod your head forward, curling your neck and upper body off the mat. Breathe in as you hold this curled position and straighten both legs sliding them along the floor. At the same time reach both arms overhead, shoulder-width apart. Breathe out as you slide you feet back and circle your arms out to the side to return to your starting position. Keep your curled up position throughout this movement.
P052	All	Oyster	Lie on your right side, lengthen your right arm out underneath your head, in line with your spine. Place your left hand in front of your chest flat on the floor, bending your elbow to support you. Bend both knees in front of you, drawing your feet back in line with your pelvis. Breathe out as you open your top knee, keeping your feet connected . Breathe in as you control your leg back to the starting position.  
P053	All	Zigzags - lying	Lie on your back , with your feet placed up against a wall, with your knees and hips at right angles to each other. Bring your feet together, connecting your inner thighs. Breathe in as you turn your  legs out from your hips, opening your knees and sliding your feet into a 'V' position with your heels together. Breathe out whilst turning your legs in from your hip joints, drawing your knees toward each other and sliding your heels away from each other. Continue to 'zig zag' your legs out up to six times or until the legs are at a comfortable distance apart. Reverse the movement back until you are back to your starting position. 
P054	All	Zig zags - sitting	Sit upright with your legs lengthened out in front of you. Straighten your arms and circle them behind you, placing your palms flat on the floor. Widen your legs slightly further than hip-width apart, flex your feet off the ground and bend your knees, bringing your legs in towards your body. Breathe out straightening your legs by sliding your heels along the floor. Keep your spine stable, your feet turned out and flexed off the floor. Breathe in whilst keeping your legs straight, roll your legs inwards from the hips. Breathe out as you maintain the turned in position of your legs and bend your knees bringing your legs back in onwards you by sliding your heels along the floor. Breathe in as you turn your legs out again, keeping your legs bent. 
P055	All	Creeping feet	Lie on your back , with your feet placed up against a wall hip-width apart. Place your knees and hips at right angles to each other. This can also be performed sitting on a chair with your feet on the floor. Breathing naturally throughout, pick your toes up and spread your feet as wide as possible onto the wall. Lift up the arches of your feet and glide your heels up the wall. Keep your feet in contact with the wall at all times. Continue creeping your feet up the wall until they can no longer remain flat. Bend your knees as you slide your feet back down the wall, returning to your starting position. 
P056	All	Foot wave front/side	Stand tall on the floor with your feet hip width apart. This can also be performed whilst sitting on a chair with your feet flat on the floor. Breathe naturally throughout. Lift your big toes off the floor, then try to  lift one toe at a time off the floor. Replace the toes down in sequence continuing one toe at a time, starting from the little toe. Reverse the movement, by lifting the little toe off the floor first one toe at a time. 
P057	All	Ankle circles	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Fold one leg in towards you clasping your hands around your thigh, lifting your lower leg up so it is higher above your knee. Keep your leg still, flex your foot  and circle it outwards. Complete a full circle working from your ankle joint and keeping your foot lengthened. Complete up to five times before reversing the direction so your foot is turning inwards. 
P058	All	Standing on one leg	Stand tall on the floor, with your legs together, connecting your inner thighs. Breathe out transfer your weight onto your left leg, keeping your pelvis level . Bend your right knee as you lift your foot off the floor drawing it up towards your body. Breathe in as you hold this position, lengthening the spine. Breathe out as you slowly return your leg to your starting position, evenly distributing your weight. 
P059	All	Single leg slide with arm raise	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor. As you breathe out, extend one leg as you lift your arm above your head. As you breathe back in, return to the start position. 
P060	All, lumbar spine flexion, hip flexion, hip adduction, hip internal rotation	Piriformis stretch	Start on all fours, and bring your knee under your body, resting against your stomach, while your leg turns inwards. Now slowly lean forwards to create a stretch in the buttock muscle.  
P061	All	Arm scissors	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor, and your arms in front of you pointing towards the ceiling. As you breathe out, extend one arm towards your hip and the opposite arm towards your head. As you breathe back in, return to the start position. 
P062	All	Chest openings	Lie on your back, with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor, and your arms in front of you pointing towards the ceiling. As you breathe out, bring your arms down to the floor in a circular position, to create an opening and stretch to the chest. As you breathe back in, return to the start position. 
			